OBJECTIVE: To present a computer vision system in HRCT images, locally developed system called for the detection and quantification of pulmonary emphysema (SISDEP). Compare this system to a computer system of free access. METHODS: 33 HRCT images were used in 11 patients with COPD tomographic cuts apex, hilum and base. The SISDEP was compared to Osiris Medical Imaging Software Program as the segmentation of the lung parenchyma; Precision measurements of the cross-sectional area of the lungs in mm2, mean lung density (MLD), the relative area (RA, relative area) of voxels with a density of < -950 Hounsfield units (RA -950), 15Âº values percentile low attenuation (Perc15) and viewing areas hyperinflated a color mask. RESULTS: The two systems were efficient lung segmentation; but SISDEP made automatically and faster. In comparing the sectional area measures the lungs, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15, there was a high correlation (r2 = 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, and 1.00, respectively) between the two systems. The color mask tool SISDEP allowed excellent visualization of hyperinflated areas, discriminating them from normal areas. CONCLUSIONS: SISDEP was efficient in targeting the lungs and the collection of quantitative data in lung aeration with excellent correlation with the OMIS. The SISDEP is a promising computational tool for the diagnostic evaluation and monitoring of the progression of emphysema in HRCT images of COPD patients. Key words: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; Emphysema; computed tomography X-ray; Making computer-assisted decisions.     Introduction COPD is a serious problem of public health worldwide, with high morbidity and mortality. In Brazil, there are over 46 million people aged from 40 years; of these, 11 million are smokers, and about 10 million are living with COPD. Pulmonary emphysema is one of its main components, being characterized by an abnormal permanent enlargement of the alveolar spaces distal to the terminal bronchioles.(1) CT, especially HRCT, is an excellent tool for the diagnosis of emphysema component in COPD.(2,3) The reading of HRCT images on radiological film, or even in electronic form on the computer screen, is subject to limitations inherent to subjectivity and variability intra and inter.(2) On the other hand, the extraction of quantitative data regarding the density of parenchyma to determine accurately the degree of lung tissue aeration, an excellent correlation with the degree of emphysema in histopathology.(4) Computer-aided diagnosis systems is gaining more space in various diagnostic modalities. These systems are designed to reduce the examination time reading and at the same time, increase diagnostic accuracy, helping the radiologist in their interpretation.(5,6) is as computer vision operation to automate and integrate a wide range of processes and representations used to improve the perception of vision.(7) Computer vision uses several digital image processing techniques (PDI) for the purpose of segmenting, recognizing and identifying details of the region of interest in the image, automatically or semi-automatically.(8) These techniques can be used to detect and quantify emphysematous lung regions.(2) A computer vision system for the detection and quantification of pulmonary emphysema component in CT images can provide physicians and patients with another important tool to aid in the diagnosis and assessment of disease progression and its response treatment.(9) The availability of CT scans in electronic format, such as, for example, compact disks, opens the opportunity for the quantification of emphysema through the use of easy application programs on personal computers of office or imaging services. Currently, such programs are not available for routine use by the clinician or by the radiologist. Recently, we developed a computer vision system, which we call system for the detection and quantification of pulmonary emphysema (SISDEP). The SISDEP incorporates tools that can precisely target the lung parenchyma from HRCT images, automatic extraction of quantitative data of lung aeration and the estimation of the degree of emphysema on CT slices.(10:11) The objectives of this study were: 1. to present the SISDEP and its evaluation tools of pulmonary emphysema in HRCT images of COPD patients; and 2. compare SISDEP a free access system (Osiris Medical Imaging Software, Digital Imaging Unit, Geneva, Switzerland) and the segmentation of the lungs on HRCT images, data collection for quantitative analysis and visual identification of areas hyperinflated a color mask.   Methods This was a prospective study for the development of a new computer system that included the following steps: 1. acquisition of HRCT images of COPD patients; 2. Development of SISDEP; and 3. comparing the SISDEP the Osiris system. The database consisted of 33 HRCT images obtained from 11 patients with COPD and clinically stable. All patients underwent chest X-ray previously to rule out other diseases of the chest, and electrocardiogram and echocardiogram to rule out arrhythmias and heart diseases. Also they underwent spirometry before and after bronchodilator administration, in the morning. The following inclusion criteria were used: patients of both sexes, older than 50 years of age diagnosed with mild COPD, moderate or severe and stable disease. The stability of COPD was characterized by the absence of emergency care or need hospitalization and symptoms unchanged in the last two months. Exclusion criteria were the presence of serious arrhythmias, previous or diagnosed heart disease during the electrocardiogram or echocardiogram; hypertension (systolic blood pressure ≥ 180 mmHg and / or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 120 mmHg); and other chronic diseases in activity or other lung diseases. Of the patients included in the study, four were female and 7 were male, with ages ranging from 59 to 74 years, mean 65 years; body mass index of 25 Â ± 4.4 kg / m2; FEV1 of 0.86 Â ± 0.53 L (33 Â ± 16% of predicted); CVF of 2.29 Â ± 0.69 L (70 Â ± 13% of predicted) and FEV1 / FVC of 41 Â ± 13%. One patient had mild COPD, 3 moderate and severe intensity 7, according to the Global Initiative classification criteria for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease.(12) obtaining the images, we used the scanner Aukelet model (Toshiba TSX-003A, Tokyo, Japan). Prior to the acquisition of the images for each test, the device was calibrated for density -1,000 Hounsfield units (HU). Calibration for the water density was held in a period not exceeding three months of the exams, according to the technical specifications of the manufacturer.(13) was carried out prior to the acquisition, a tomographic cut phantom water, whose density is already known for the analysis and control of calibration. The images of patients with COPD have acquired under the following conditions: 1.5mm collimation of 312 mm field of view of 1.8 s cutting time, voltage at 120 kV, 200 mA of electric current and adjust the tube filament pulmonary window; center and width, respectively -600 / 1600 UH and reconstruction matrix of 512 × 512 pixels. It used the filter (bone) in high-resolution algorithm for image reconstruction.(14) The images were obtained specifically for a protocol of previous research to this study from August 2005 to March 2006. Tomographic cuts were performed in the supine position, in three regions: apex (2 cm above the aortic arch), hilo (1 cm below the carina) and base (2 cm above the diaphragm).(15,16) Both the previous study and the present study were approved by the ethics committee and research hospital where tests were performed. The SISDEP system was developed from PDI techniques aimed at gathering tools capable of: target, accurately and automatically, the pulmonary parenchyma, including the section area measurements of lung in HRCT images, mean lung density (MLD) , percentage of hyperinflated areas consistent with emphysema - relative area of volume units (voxels) with a density of < -950 uh, and relative area (RA, relative area) of -950 - and the values of 15Âº low attenuation percentile (Perc15) .(10.16) The -950 HU threshold was chosen because it has been verified microscopically for thin sections (1-2 mm thick) HRCT for the quantification of emphysema.(5) An additional tool called colored mask, able to highlight the voxels with densities which are at pre-defined user groups, has been implemented. This tool accurately show the different ranges of lung density, highlighting hyperinflated areas that are difficult for the human eye in the range of grayscale.(10) The color mask tool has a dual function. It allows the calculation of RA lung (in%) with a density below a threshold preset by the operator density, for example, -950 HU for the study of hyperinflated regions (AR -950), and at the same time facilitates the visualization of areas that the system considers to be abnormal.(11) This tool is semi-automatic; the user enters the density range and select the color you want to apply, when you press a button, the result leaves immediately, indicating the area and the percentage that the chosen range occupies in the image. For example, selecting the light green color (or any other color chosen by the user) for voxels with density less than -950 HU (emphysematous or hyperinflated lung) and selecting the blue color for those with density between -950 and -500 HU ( normally aerated lung) yields the percentage and the area corresponding to each track.(10,11) The OMIS is used as a research tool for quantitative studies of lung densitometry.(17) This program is widely used in the international scientific community, by doctors and researchers to study and tomographic image analysis, showing various features of PDI. It is a system with more general applications and free access.(18) The segmentation of lung parenchyma that is available enables a manual adjustment by the user. The same is true for obtaining the average of measurements, standard deviation, minimum and maximum value of the attenuation coefficient per unit area (pixel) and sectional area of ​​the lungs of images, which are presented separately for each lung, when the option is selected "data show" on your toolbar, after segmentation.(18) To calculate the DPM, Perc15 and RA -950, the data needs to be exported to other programs such as Excel, for further processing, which requires a period of time considerably larger than automated systems. Figure 1 shows the interfaces of the SISDEP and Osiris system. All images were segmented in both systems and, soon after, the section areas of the lungs measures were calculated, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15. To Osiris system, the last three items were processed using the Excel program. The targets are made by two systems were compared visually by two observers (a lung and a radiologist) independent and were classified as: 1. discordant in case of gross errors, such as lack of targeting more than one third of the lungs, or even an entire lung, or the inclusion of areas of the chest wall or mediastinum structures such as the heart and great vessels; 2. partially concordant when the contours are shown superimposed in over 80% of the stroke; and 3. agreement, when the contours were overlapping or minimum point differences throughout its length. To check the accuracy of segmentation and quantitative analysis obtained by SISDEP, the area of ​​each lung measures, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15 of it were compared to the measurements obtained from the OMIS and complemented in Excel®. In the statistical analysis, the variables calculated pulmonary sectional area, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15 were tested for normal distribution using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Then the Pearson correlation test was applied to the values ​​from the two systems. The variables were grouped in pairs and the results presented in scatter plots with the respective correlation coefficient. It was considered an error αde 0.05 as the cutoff point for determining statistical significance. All statistical analyzes were obtained through OriginPro program version 7.5 (OriginLab, Northampton, MA, USA).(19) Results The pulmonary targets were classified as follows: 17 (51%) as partially agree and 16 (49%) as concordant. There were no discordant lung segmentations. Representative examples of segmentation of HRCT scans performed automatically by the SISDEP and the Osiris system are shown in Figures 2 and 3. There are two outlines, one yellow, representing the OMIS, and other red, representing the SISDEP. Examples of concordant segmentation are shown in Figure 2, where there is all traced the outline, with some small differences caused by the inaccuracy of the Osiris system segmentation. partially concordant segmentation examples are shown in Figure 3. In Figure 3a, the partial agreement was generated by inaccuracies of the two systems; in Figure 3b, the partial agreement was due to the imprecision of segmentation SISDEP as in Figure 3c that was caused by the imprecision of the Osiris system segmentation. The scatter plots for the area measurements of lung section, MLD, RA -950, Perc15 between Osiris and SISDEP systems, and the correlation coefficient (r2) with significance level for each pair of variables are presented Figure 4. There was a significant correlation between the measurements obtained by the two systems for the four variables. The color mask tool SISDEP was programmed to highlight colors lung tissue according to predetermined density ranges: hyperinflated areas of -1100 to -951 HU (light green).(4.11) Figure 5 shows, respectively, the original image (Figure 5a), the segmented image (Figure 5b) and the results obtained using the color mask with SISDEP (Figure 5c), at the hyperinflated region ( emphysema) is 44.2%, highlighted by the color green, and healthy tissue, in gray, with 46.4%.   Discussion The present study tested a system auxiliary imaging developed in Brazil (SISDEP), comparing it with the results of a system known internationally (Osiris) as the SISDEP the ability to perform automatic segmentation of the lung area and to quantify total area of ​​emphysema in isolated tomographic images based on the attenuation coefficient value provided HRCT image. The SISDEP was able to process quantitative data of lung aeration, assisting in the evaluation of emphysema extent in patients with COPD, the first study of its kind developed in our country. The SISDEP proved capable of performing automatic segmentation of lung parenchyma and the extraction of the lung area as well as calculate the semi-automatic mode the variables related to the severity of the pulmonary emphysema component, DPM, RA -950 and Perc15.(10.11) This system also provides a color mask tool that allows better visualization of hyperinflated areas, contrasting them with normal areas.(11) Both the lung segmentation and quantitative aeration data obtained by SISDEP correlated to acquired by Osiris system, with the advantage of the first be processed automatically and therefore more quickly and without the need for additional analysis by other programs. Moreover, the lack of possibility for manual adjustment after the automatic segmentation of the lung outline SISDEP consists of a limitation even in cases in which such a procedure is made necessary by imperfections or targeting errors. Currently, there is no consensus on the optimal parameter for the quantification of emphysema in HRCT images, and various indices are used. Several authors used in isolation some indices such as the percentage of areas hyperinflated with density < -900 uh, (20) measures of psychological distress and Perc15 as well as the analysis of the lung parenchyma textures, there is no gold standard.(16,21,22) The SISDEP is able to simultaneously extract several quantitative indices used to estimate the degree of emphysema, enabling a more detailed analysis of lung aeration. The lack of a gold standard is due in part to the fact that the radiological densities extracted from the tomographic images are influenced by the section thickness, the image reconstruction algorithm, the filter used, calibration and type of tomograph, resulting in the inclusion of artifacts (noise) in image density information. Recently, the use of thin slices (1-2 mm thick) with reconstruction of images using filter patterns (not edges enhancers used in conventional cuts) can minimize these problems.(23) Furthermore, the proper selection thresholds for representing low density areas is crucial hyperinflated (-1000 to -950UH; 900 -950 HU, -930 HU, or < -900 HU), and this selection varies between different studies.(4,9,20,24,25) The lack of consensus on the attenuation threshold occurs by the lack of standardization of CT parameters. This study has some limitations. The SISDEP was used in a small number of images acquired from the same scanner and following the reconstruction algorithm commonly used in high-resolution images. In addition, we used the sharpening filter edges during acquisition and image processing. This type of processing changes the attenuation coefficient, especially at the interfaces between very different densities of structures (such as vessels and airspaces), resulting in more noise and possibly overestimating the percentage of hyperinflated areas.(23) Further work is needed in order to validate the SISDEP from images obtained at different CT scanners and devices with multiple detectors (26) with varying degrees of cutting thickness and with different reconstruction algorithms in a greater number of images. The clinical relevance of this work lies in the possibility of applying SISDEP in the early diagnosis of COPD in the evaluation of its progression, the ideal candidate selection reduction surgery, emphysema and even in research to evaluate the impact of therapeutic interventions on emphysema .(27,28) Future work aimed at volumetric quantification (densitometry) of hyperinflated lung areas and the assessment of spatial organization patterns of emphysema areas (cluster analysis) will expand its clinical application and research.(29,30) It is concluded that the SISDEP proved efficient for targeting lung in HRCT images, with excellent correlation with the OMIS the extraction of quantitative data of lung aeration. The SISDEP is presented as a promising computational tool that adds to HRCT possibilities of quantitative analysis automatically and semi-automatically for diagnosing and assessing the progression of emphysema in patients with COPD.   