ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: To present a locally developed computer vision system for HRCT images, called SISDEP ("SIStema para a Detecção e a quantificação de Enfisema Pulmonar" - System for the Detection and Quantification of Pulmonary Emphysema). 
 To compare this system with a freeware computer system. METHODS: This study analyzed 33 HRCT scans of 11 COPD patients, with tomographic sections of the lung apex, hilum and base.
 The SISDEP system was compared with the Osiris Medical Imaging Software Program (OMIS) with regard to lung parenchyma segmentation; the precision of cross-sectional lung area measures in mm2, mean lung density (MLD), relative area (RA) of the voxels with a density of < -950 Hounsfield Units (ra -950), 15th percentile of low attenuation (Perc15), and visualization of hyperinflated areas with a color mask.
 RESULTS: Both systems delivered an efficient lung segmentation, but SISDEP did it automatically and faster.
 The results obtained for cross-sectional lung area, MLD, Perc15 and RA -950 revealed high correlation levels (r2 = 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, and 1.00, respectively) between the two systems.
 SISDEP's color mask tool enabled an excellent visualization of hyperinflated areas, distinguishing them from normal areas.
 CONCLUSIONS: SISDEP was efficient in segmenting the lungs and obtaining quantitative  lung aeration data, presenting an excellent correlation with the Osiris system.
 SISDEP is a promising computational tool for diagnosing and monitoring the evolution of emphysemas through HRCT images of COPD patients. Key words: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; Emphysema; X-ray computed tomography; Computer-assisted decision-making.
     COPD is a serious public health problem worldwide, with high morbidity and mortality rates. 
 In Brazil, there are over 46 million people aged 40 years or older; of these, over 11 million are smokers, and approximately 10 million have COPD.
 Pulmonary emphysema is one of its main elements, and it is characterized by an abnormal, permanent increase of the alveolar spaces distal to the terminal bronchiole.
(1) CT, especially HRCT, is an excellent tool for the diagnosis of the emphysema element in COPD.(2,3) The reading of HRCT images on radiological film, or even in electronic media such as computer screens, is subject to the limitations inherent to intra- and inter-observer subjectivity.
(2) On the other hand, quantitative data on the density of the parenchyma enables an accurate assessment of the severity of lung tissue aeration, presenting an excellent correlation with the emphysema degree revealed by histopathology.
(4) Computer-assisted diagnosis has been gaining ground in various diagnostic modalities. The purpose of these computer systems is to reduce the time required for reading test
results and to increase diagnostic accuracy, aiding radiologists in their interpretive tasks.(5,6) The concept of computer vision refers to the automation and integration of a wide range of processes and representations used to improve the perception of vision.
(7) Computer vision uses several digital image processing (DIP) techniques in order to automatically or semi-automatically segment, recognize and identify details of the relevant region in the image.(8) Such techniques can be used to detect and quantify emphysematous lung regions.
(2) A computer vision system for the detection and quantification of the pulmonary emphysema element in CT images can provide patients and physicians with another important tool for the diagnosis of the disease and for the assessment of its progression and treatment response.
(9) The availability of CT scans in electronic formats such as compact discs opens up the opportunity to quantify the emphysema with the help of user-friendly software programs on personal computers or imaging centers.
 Such software programs are not currently available for routine use by clinicians and radiologists. We have recently developed a computer vision system, which we have called SISDEP ("SIStema para a Detecção e a quantificação de Enfisema Pulmonar" - System for the Detection and Quantification of Pulmonary Emphysema).  SISDEP includes tools that offer accurate lung parenchyma segmentation from HRCT images, making it possible to automatically obtain quantitative lung aeration data and to estimate the emphysema degree in CT slices.
(10,11) The objectives of this study were: (1) to present SISDEP and its tools for evaluating  pulmonary emphysema in HRCT scans of COPD patients; and (2) to compare SISDEP with a freeware system (Osiris Medical Imaging Software, Digital Imaging Unit, Geneva, Switzerland) with regard to lung segmentation in HRCT images, data collection for quantitative analysis and visual identification of hyperinflated areas by using a color mask.
   Methods This is a prospective study for the development of a new computer system. The study comprised the following steps: (1) acquiring HRCT images of COPD patients; (2) developing the SISDEP system; and (3) comparing SISDEP with the Osiris system.
 The database consisted of 33 HRCT images obtained from 11 clinically stable DPOC patients.
 All patients underwent chest X-ray to rule out other chest diseases, as well as electrocardiogram and echocardiogram to rule out arrhythmias and heart diseases. Spirometry was also performed, before and after bronchodilator administration, in the morning. The following inclusion criteria were used: patients of both sexes, aged over 50 years, with mild, moderate or severe COPD diagnosis, and clinically stable.
 COPD stability was characterized by the lack of need for emergency treatment or hospitalization, and by unchanged symptoms in the previous two months. Exclusion criteria were as follows: severe arrhythmias; a history of heart disease; heart disease diagnosis during electrocardiography or echocardiography; systemic arterial hypertension (systolic blood pressure ≥ 180 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 120 mmHg); and other pneumopathies or active chronic diseases.
 Four of the patients included in the study were female and seven were male. Ages ranged from 59 to 74 years, averaging 65 years; body mass index of 25 Â± 4.4 kg/m2; FEV1 of 0.86 ± 0.53 L (33 ± 16% of predicted value); FVC of 2.29 ± 0.69 L (70 ± 13% of predicted value); and FEV1/FVC of 41 ± 13%.
 One patient had mild COPD, three had moderate COPD and seven had severe COPD, according to the classification criteria of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease.(12) The images were obtained using an Aukelet
CT scanner (Toshiba TSX-003A, Tokyo, Japan).
 Prior to the acquisition of the images, for each test, the device was calibrated to an air density of -1000 Hounsfield Units (HU). Water density calibration was carried out at least three months before the exams, as per the manufaturer's technical specifications.(13) For calibration analysis and control, a CT water phantom slice of known density was obtained prior to image acquisition.
 The images of COPD patients were obtained under the following conditions: 1.5mm collimation slices; 312mm field of view; 1.8s slice intervals; 120kV voltage; 200mA tube filament current and lung window adjustment;  -600/1600 HU center and width, respectively; and reconstruction with a 512×512 pixel matrix.
 A filter (bone) was applied to the high-resolution algorithm for image reconstruction.
(14) The images were specifically obtained for a previous study, conducted between August 2005 and March 2006.
 CT slices were obtained, with the patient in the supine position, in three regions: apex (2cm above the aortic arch), hilum (1cm below the carina) and base (2cm above the diaphragm).(15,16) Both the previous and the present study were approved by the ethics and reearch committee of the hospital where the tests were performed. The SISDEP system was developed based on DIP techniques, with the purpose of aggregating tools for an accurate and automatic lung parenchyma segmentation, including the measures of the cross-sectional lung area in HRCT images, mean lung density (MLD), percentage of hyperinflated areas consistent with emphysema — relative area of the volume units (voxels) with a density of < -950 HU and a relative area (RA) of -950 — and the 15th percentile of low attenuation (perc15). 
(10.16) A -950 HU threshold was chosen because it has been microscopically validated for thin HRCT slices (1-2mm thick) in the quantification of emphysema
(5) An additional tool known as a colored mask, which can highlight voxel density ranges previously determined by he user, has been implemented.
 This tool accurately displays the different ranges of pulmonary density, highlighting hyperinflated areas that are difficult for the human eye to differentiate within the grayscale.(10) The color mask tool has a dual function. It allows the calculation of the lung's RA (in %) with a density below a specific threshold pre-selected by the operator — e.g., -950 HU for the study of hyperinflated regions (RA -950) — while making it easier to visualize the areas that the system regards as abnormal.
(11) This is a semi-automatic tool; the user enters the density range, selects the desired color and, by pressing a button, immediatly obtains the results, which indicates the area and percentage that the chosen range occupies in the image.
 For example, by selecting the color light green (or any other color chosen by the user) for voxel densities below -950 HU (emphysematous or hyperinflated lung) and the color blue for voxel densities between -950 and -500 HU (normally aerated lung), the user obtains the area and percentage corresponding to each range.
(10,11) The Osiris system is used as a research tool for quantitative studies on pulmonary densitometry.(17) The software offers several DIP resources and is widely used in the international scientific community, both by physicians and researchers, for CT imaging studies and analyses.
 It is a freeware system with more generic applications.
(18) Its lung parenchyma segmentation resources allow users to manually adjust segmentation parameters. 
 The same applies to the measurement of means, standard deviations, minimum and maximum attenuation coefficient per area unit (pixel) and cross-sectional area in lung images - which are presented separately for each lung when the 'show data' option is selected from the toolbar after segmentation.
(18) To calculate the MLD, Perc15 and RA -950, users must export the data to other programs, such as Excel®, for further processing, a task that takes considerably longer when automatic
systems are used. 
 Figure 1 shows the interfaces of the SISDEP and Osiris systems. All images were segmented in both systems; immediatly after that, the measures of the cross-sectional lung area, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15 were calculated. In the case of the Osiris system, the last three aspects were processed on Excel®. The segmentations presented by the two systems were visually compared by two independent observers (a pulmonologist and a radiologist) and classified as follows: (1) discordant,  in cases of gross errors, such as the absence of segmentation in more than one-third of the lungs (or even an entire lung), or the inclusion of thoracic wall areas or mediastinum structures, such as the heart and large vessels; (2) partially concordant, when contours overlapped in over 80% of the outiline; and (3) concordant, when contours overlapped or differences  were minimal.
 In order to determine the accuracy of the
segmentation and of the quantitative analysis obtained by SISDEP, each lung's area measures, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15 were compared to the results obtained by the Osiris system and complemented on Excel®.
 Using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, a statistical analysis tested the distribution of the calculated variables for the cross-sectional lung area, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15.
 Subsequntly, the Pearson correlation test was applied to the values obtained by the two systems.
 The variables were paired and the results were presented in scatter plots with the corresponding correlation coefficient. An α error of 0.05 was adopted as the cut-off point for determining statistical significance
 All statistical analyses were obtained using the OriginPro software, version 7.5 (OriginLab, Northampton, MA, USA).
(19) Results Lung segmentations were classified as follows: 17 (51%) as partially concordant and 16 (49%) as concordant.
 There were no discordant lung segmentations. Representative examples of automatic HRCT scan segmentations carried out by SISDEP and the Osiris system can be found in Figures 1 and 3. There are two contours: the yellow one represents Osiris, while the red one represents SISDEP. Examples of concordant segmentation are shown in Figure 2, where it is possible to see the entire outline with a few minor differences caused by the inaccuracy of the segmentation obtained by the Osiris system.
 Examples of partially concordant segmentation are shown in Figure 3. In Figure 3a, partial concordance was generated by inaccuracies of the two systems; in Figure 3b, partial concordance was caused by the inaccuracy of the SISDEP segmentation, whereas in Figure 3c it was caused by the inaccuracy of the segmentation obtained by the Osiris system.
 Scatter plots comparing the results obtained by the two systems with regard to cross-sectional lung area measures, MLD, RA -950 and Perc15, as well as the correlation coefficient (r2) and the significance level for each pair of variables, are shown in Figure 4.
 There was significant correlation between the results obtained by the two systems for the four variables under study.
 SISDEP's color mask tool was programmed to highlight the lung tissue according to predetermined density ranges: hyperinflated areas ranging from -1100 to -951 HU (light green);(4.11) Figure 5 shows the original image (Figure 5a), the segmented image (Figure 5b) and the results obtained using the SISDEP color mask (Figure 5c); highlighted in green, the hyperinflated region (emphysema) represents 44.2%, whereas the healthy tissue, in gray, represents 46.4%.
   Discussion This study tested a computer-assisted diagnosis system developed in Brazil (SISDEP) by comparing it with the results of  a worldwide known system (Osiris). The purpose of the study was to test SISDEP's ability to perform automatic lung area segmentation and quantify the emphysema's overall area in isolated tomographic slices, based on the attenuation coefficient value provided by HRCT images. 
 SISDEP was able to process quantitative lung aeration data, aiding in the evaluation of emphysema extent in COPD patients, this being the first study of its kind in Brazil.
 SISDEP was able to perform automatic
lung parenchyma segmentation and to measure
the cross-sectional lung area, as well as to semi-automatically calculate the variables pertaining to the severity of the pulmonary emphysema element: MLD, RA -950 and Perc15.
(10.11) This system also provides a color mask tool that improves visualization of hyperinflated areas by contrasting them with normal areas.(11) Both the lung segmentation and the quantitative aeration data obtained by SISDEP presented an excellent correlation with those obtained by the Osiris system, the former having the advantage of performing those tasks automatically, and therefore more rapidly, without the need for complementary analytical software.
 On the other hand, the impossibility of manually adjusting the automatic segmentation of the lung contour on SISDEP constitites a limitation
in cases in which such adjustments are necessary due to segmentation errors or imperfections.
 There is currently no consensus on the optimal parameter for quantifying emphysema in HRCT images, and several indices are therefore used.
 Several authors have independently used indices such as the percentage of hyperinflated areas with density < -900 HU, (20) MLD and Perc5 measures, and the analysis of lung parenchyma textures; there is currently no gold standard.
(16,21,22) SISDEP simultaneously extracts several quantitative indices that are used to estimate emphysema severity, enabling a more detailed lung aeration analysis.
 The lack of a gold standard is in part due to the fact that radiological densities obtained from CT images are influenced by slice thickness, image reconstruction algorithm, filter, calibration and CT scanner type, resulting in the inclusion of artifacts (noise) in the image's density data.
 It has recently been reported that the use of thin slices (1-2 mm thick) with image reconstruction using standard filters (rather than the edge-enhancing filters used in conventional slices) can minimize these problems.
(23) Furthermore,the selection of appropriate thresholds for the low densities that represent hyperinflated areas is crucial (-1000 to -950 HU; -950 to 900 HU; -930 HU; or < -900 HU), and such thresholds vary significantly between different studies.
(4,9,20,24,25) The lack of consensus on the attenuation threshold is due to the lack of standardized CT parameters.
 This study has some limitations. The SISDEP software was used on a small number of scans, which were taken by the same scanner, and applied the same reconstruction algorithm that is commonly used for high-resolution images.
 Moreover, an edge-enhancing filter was used when acquiring and processing the images. This kind of processing affects the attenuation coefficient, especially at the interface between structures with very different densities (such as vessels and airspaces), producing more noise and possibly overestimating the percentage of hyperinflated areas.
(23) Further studies are needed in order to validate the SISDEP software with images obtained from different CT scanners and multiple detection devices, (26)as well as  with slices of different thickness, different reconstruction algorithms, and a larger number of images. 
 The clinical relevance of this study lies in the possibility of using SISDEP to establish an early diagnosis of COPD, to monitor its progression, to select the ideal candidate for emphysema reduction surgery, and even to study the impact of therapeutic interventions on emphysema.
(27,28) Future research on the volumetric quantification (densitovolumetry) of hyperinflated lung areas and the evaluation of the spatial organization patterns of emphysema areas (cluster analysis) may expand its clinical and research applications.
(29,30) In conclusion, SISDEP proved to be an efficient tool for lung segmentation through HRCT images, presenting an excellent correlation with the quantitative lung aeration data obtained by the Osiris system.
 SISDEP is a promising HRCT computational tool that offers automatic and semi-automatic quantitative analyses for diagnosing and monitoring the evolution of emphysema in COPD patients more efficiently.
   