 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Present a system of computer vision in the images of HRCT, locally developed and named the System for the Detection and quantification of Pulmonary Emphysema (SISDEP). Compare this system to a computational system of free access. METHODS: we used 33 images of HRCT of 11 patients with COPD with ct section at the apex, hilum and base. The SISDEP was compared with the Osiris Medical Imaging Software Program regarding to the segmentation of the lung parenchyma; the accuracy of the measurements of the area of cross-section of the lungs in mm2, density lung medium (DPM), the percentage of the relative area (RA, relative area) of the voxels with a density < -950 hounsfield units (ra -950), the values of 15Âº percentile of low attenuation (perc15) and visualization of the areas hiperaeradas by the mask color. RESULTS: The two systems performed a segmentation of pulmonary efficient; however, the SISDEP did it in automatic mode and faster. In the comparison of the measures of area of the section of the lungs, DPM, Perc15 and RA -950, there was a high correlation (r2 = 0,99; 0,99; 0,99; and 1.00, respectively) between the two systems. The mask tool color of the SISDEP allowed excellent visualization of the areas hiperaeradas, discriminated against those of normal areas. CONCLUSIONS: THE SISDEP proved to be efficient in the segmentation of the lungs and in the extraction of quantitative data of the aeration lung with excellent correlation with the system Osiris. The SISDEP constitutes a promising computational tool for the diagnostic evaluation and the monitoring of the evolution of emphysema in images of HRCT of patients with COPD. Descriptors: chronic obstructive pulmonary Disease; Emphysema; computed Tomography X-ray; Decision making, computer-assisted. Introduction COPD is a major public health problem worldwide, with high morbidity and mortality. In Brazil, there are more than 46 million people aged 40 years; of these, more than 11 million are smokers, and approximately 10 million are living with COPD. The pulmonary emphysema is one of its main components, being characterized by an abnormal increase and permanent spaces alveolar distal to the bronquíolo terminal. (1) THE CT, especially HRCT, is an excellent tool for the diagnosis of the component of emphysema in COPD. (2,3) the reading of The images of HRCT in film, radiographic film, or even through electronic means, on the screen of the computer, is subject to limitations inherent to the subjectivity and variability intra and interobservadores. (2) on the other hand, the extraction of quantitative data related to the density of the parenchyma allows you to determine with precision the degree of aeration of the lung tissue, keeping excellent correlation with the degree of emphysema on histopathology. (4) The diagnosis is aided by computer systems is gaining more and more space in various modalities diagnostic. These systems have the purpose of reducing the reading time of the examination, and, at the same time, increase the diagnostic accuracy, helping the radiologist in their interpretation. (5,6) Conceives of it as a computer vision operation to automate and integrate a broad range of processes and representations used to enhance the perception of vision. (7) computer vision uses several techniques of digital image processing (PDI) with the purpose of segmenting, recognizing and identifying details of the region of interest in the image, so automatic or semi-automatic. (8) These techniques can be used for the detection and quantification of regions enfisematosas in the lungs. (2) A system of computer vision for the detection and quantification of the component of pulmonary emphysema in the images, tomographic can offer to doctors and patients, an important tool in aid to diagnosis and in the evaluation of the progression of the disease and its response to treatment. (9) The availability of CT examinations in electronic format, such as, for example, in compact disks, it opens the opportunity for the quantification of emphysema by means of the use of programs of easy application on personal computers in the office or in image services. Currently, such programs are not available for routine use by the clinician or by the radiologist. Recently, we have developed a system of computer vision, which we call a System for the Detection and quantification of Pulmonary Emphysema (SISDEP). The SISDEP incorporates tools capable of precisely target the lung parenchyma from images of HRCT, making possible the automatic extraction of quantitative data of the aeration lung and making it possible to estimate the degree of emphysema in a ct section. (10,11) The objectives of this work were to: 1. display the SISDEP and its tools of assessment of pulmonary emphysema in the images of HRCT of patients with COPD; and 2. compare the SISDEP to a system of free access (Osiris Medical Imaging Software Program; Digital Imaging Unit, Geneva, Switzerland) and to the segmentation of the lungs in the images of HRCT, data extraction for the quantitative analysis and visual identification of the areas hiperaeradas by the mask color. Methods this is a prospective study for the development of a new computational system that was comprised of the following steps: 1. acquisition of the images of HRCT of patients with COPD; 2. development of the SISDEP; and 3. comparison of the SISDEP to the system Osiris. The database was composed of 33 images of HRCT scan obtained from 11 patients with COPD and clinically stable. All the patients underwent chest radiography previously to rule out other diseases of the chest, as well as electrocardiogram and echocardiogram to rule out arrhythmias and heart diseases. Also performed spirometry before and after administration of a bronchodilator, in the period of the morning. The following inclusion criteria were used: patients of both sexes, older than 50 years of age with a diagnosis of COPD mild, moderate or severe and with stable disease. The stability of COPD was characterized by the absence of need for emergency care or hospitalization, and symptoms unchanged in the last two months. The exclusion criteria were: presence of serious arrhythmias, heart diseases prior or diagnosed during the realization of the electrocardiogram or echocardiogram; systemic arterial hypertension (systolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 180 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 120 mmHg); and other chronic diseases activity or other pulmonary disease. Of the patients included in the study, 4 were female and 7 were male, with ages that ranged between 59 and 74 years, mean 65 years; body mass index of 25 Â± 4.4 kg/m2; FEV1 of 0.86 Â± 0,53 L (33 Â± 16% predicted); FVC from 2.29 Â± 0,69 L (70 Â± 13% predicted) and FEV1/FVC of 41 Â± 13%. One patient had COPD mild, 3 moderate and 7 intensity severe, according to the classification criteria of the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstrutive Lung Disease. (12) In obtaining the images, we used the ct scanner model Aukelet (Toshiba TSX-003A, Tokyo, Japan). Prior to the acquisition of the images, for each examination, the apparatus was calibrated for density of air at -1000 Hounsfield units (UH). The calibration for the density of water was carried out in a period not exceeding three months of the completion of the exams, according to the technical specification of the manufacturer. (13) Was carried out, prior to the acquisition, a cut ct of the phantom water, whose density is already known for the analysis and the control of the calibration. The images of the patients with COPD were acquired under the following conditions: cuts with collimation of 1.5 mm, field of view of 312 mm, the cutting time of 1.8 s, with 120 Kv voltage, 200 mA of electrical current to the filament of the tube and adjustment of the window of the lungs; the center and width, respectively, -600/1600 HU and reconstruction matrix of 512 × 512 pixels. We used the filter (bone) in the algorithm of high-resolution for the reconstruction of the images. (14) The images were obtained specifically for a research protocol prior to the present study, in the period from August 2005 to march 2006. The ct section were performed in the supine position, in three regions: the apex (2 cm above the aortic arch), hilo (1 cm below the carina) and the base (2 cm above the diaphragm). (15,16) in Both the protocol of previous research and the present work were approved by the research ethics committee of the hospital where they were carried out the examinations. The system SISDEP was developed from techniques of the PDI, aiming to gather tools to be able to: target, accurately and automatically, the pulmonary parenchyma, including the measures of area of the section of the lungs in the images of HRCT, density lung medium (DPM), percentage of areas hiperaeradas compatible with emphysema - the relative area of the units of volume (voxels) with a density < -950 hu, and relative area (RA, relative area) of -950 - and the values of 15Âº percentile of low attenuation (perc15). (10,16) The threshold of -950 HU was selected, having been validated under a microscope for thin sections (1-2 mm thick) of HRCT for the quantification of emphysema. (5) An additional tool, called the mask color, able to highlight the voxels with densities that are in the ranges pre-defined by the user, was implemented. This tool accurately shows the various ranges of density of the lung, highlighting the regions hiperaeradas that are difficult to see by the human eye in the scale of shades of gray. (10) The mask tool color has dual function. It enables the calculation of the RA of the lung (in %), with a density below a threshold density, pre-selected by the operator, for example, -950 HU in the case study regions hiperaeradas (RA -950), and, at the same time, it facilitates the visual demonstration of the areas that the system considers as abnormal. (11) This tool is semi-automated; the user types in the density range and select the color you want to apply, and, at the press of a button, the result comes out immediately, indicating the area and the percentage that the chosen track occupies in the image. As an example, by selecting the light green color (or any other color chosen by the user) to the voxels with density lower than -950 HU (lung enfisematoso or hiperaerado) and selecting the color blue for those with a density between -950 and -500 HU (lung is normally aerated), we obtain the percentage and the area corresponding to each track. (10,11) The program Osiris is used as a research tool for quantitative studies of bone densitometry of the lung. (17) This program is used a lot, in the international scientific community, by doctors and researchers for studies and analyses of images, tomographic, featuring many of the features of PDI. It is a system with more applications, and general free access. (18) The segmentation of the pulmonary parenchyma that is made available allows for a manual adjustment by the user. The same occurs for the obtaining of the measures of mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum value of the attenuation coefficients per unit of area (pixel) and the area section images of the lungs, which are presented separately for each lung, when it is selected the option "show date" on your toolbar, after the segmentation. (18) For calculation of DPM, Perc15 and RA -950 , the data needs to be exported to other programs, such as Excel®, for further processing, which demand a period of time considerably higher than that of automatic systems. Figure 1 presents the interfaces of the SISDEP system and Osiris. All images were segmented in the two systems and then we calculated the measures of the areas of section of the lungs, DPM, RA -950 and Perc15. For the system-Osiris, the last three items have been processed using the program Excel®. The targets made by the two systems were compared visually by two observers (a pulmonologist and a radiologist) independently and were classified as: 1. discordant, in the case of gross errors, such as the absence of targeting of more than one-third of the lungs, or even of a lung full, or even the inclusion of the areas of the chest wall or the structures mediastinais, such as the heart and great vessels; 2. partially concordant, when the contours showed superponíveis in more than 80% of the trace; and 3. in agreement, when the contours were superponíveis or with minimal differences punctual in all its extension. To verify the accuracy of the segmentation and quantitative analysis obtained by the SISDEP, the measures of the area of each lung, DPM, RA -950 and Perc15 of the same were compared to measures obtained from the system in Osiris and complemented in the program Excel®. In the statistical analysis, the variables calculated from the area of the section of pulmonary, DPM, Perc15 and RA -950 were tested for normal distribution by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Then, it was applied the test of Pearson's correlation for the values obtained in the two systems. The variables were grouped in pairs and the results are presented in scatter plots with the respective correlation coefficient. It was considered an error ade to 0.05 as cut-off point for the determination of statistical significance. All statistical analyses were obtained using the program OriginPro version 7.5 (OriginLab, Northampton, MA, USA). (19) Results: The segmentations of the lungs were classified as follows: 17 (51%) and partially concordant and 16 (49%) as consistent. Not observed targets pulmonary discordant. Representative examples of segmentation of the images of HRCT performed in the automatic mode by the SISDEP, and by the system Osiris are presented in Figures 2 and 3. There are two outlines, a yellow color, representing the system-Osiris, and the other of red color, representing the SISDEP. Examples of targeting concordant are shown in Figure 2, in which notes all around the drawing of the outline, with some minor differences specific to be caused by the inaccuracy of the targeting system Osiris. Examples of targeting partially concordant are shown in Figure 3. In Figure 3a, the correlation partial was generated by inaccuracies of the two systems; in Figure 3b, the correlation partial occurred by the inaccuracy of the segmentation of the SISDEP, whereas in Figure 3c this was caused by the inaccuracy of the targeting system Osiris. The scatter plots for the measures of area of the section of the lungs, DPM, RA -950, Perc15 systems between the Osiris and the SISDEP, as well as the correlation coefficient (r2) with the significance level for each pair of variables are presented in Figure 4. There was a significant correlation between the measures obtained by the two systems for the four variables studied. The mask tool color of the SISDEP was configured to highlight with colours the lung tissue according to ranges of densities previously defined: areas hiperaeradas from -1.100 to -951 UH (light green). (4,11) Figure 5 presents, respectively, the original image (Figure 5a), the image is segmented (Figure 5b), and the results of the employment of the mask colored with the SISDEP (Figure 5c), in which the region hiperaerada (with emphysema) accounted for 44.2%, highlighted by the green color, and healthy tissue, gray in color, with 46.4%. Discussion The present work tested a system to assist the image diagnosis developed in Brazil (SISDEP), by comparing it with the results of a system known internationally (Osiris) on the ability of the SISDEP to perform automatic segmentation of the area of pulmonary and quantify the total area of emphysema in a ct section isolated, based on the value of the coefficient of attenuation is provided in image of the HRCT. The SISDEP was able to process quantitative data of the aeration lung, assisting in the evaluation of the extent of emphysema in patients with COPD, being the first study of this kind developed in our country. The SISDEP proved to be capable of performing automatic segmentation of the lung parenchyma and the extraction of the measured area, lung, as well as calculate the semiautomatic mode the variables related to the severity of the component of emphysema, the DPM, the RA -950 and Perc15. (10,11), This system also provides a tool to mask the color, which lets you improve the visualization of the areas hiperaeradas, contrasting them with areas of the lung normal. (11) Both targeting the lung as the quantitative data of aeration obtained by the SISDEP correlated to the acquired by the system Osiris, with the advantage of first processing of automatic mode and, therefore, with greater speed and without the need for complementary analysis by other programs. On the other hand, the absence of the possibility of manual adjustment after the automatic segmentation of the contour lung in the SISDEP consists in a limitation even in cases in which such a procedure is necessary for imperfections or errors of targeting. Currently, there is no consensus on the parameter optimal for the quantification of emphysema in images of HRCT, and several indexes are used. Several authors used isolated some indices such as, for example, the percentage of areas hiperaeradas with density < -900 uh,(20) measures of DPM and Perc15, as well as the analysis of textures of the pulmonary parenchyma, in the absence of a gold standard. (16,21,22) THE SISDEP is able to extract simultaneously several quantitative indices used to estimate the degree of emphysema, enabling a more detailed analysis of aeration of the lung. The lack of a gold standard is due, in part, to the fact that the densities of the radiological extracted from images tomographic suffer the influence of the thickness of the slices, the algorithm of image reconstruction, the filter used, the calibration and the type of ct scanner, resulting in the inclusion of artifacts (noise) in the density information of the image. Recently, the employment of thin sections (1-2 mm thick) with reconstruction of the images using filters patterns (not enhancers of the edges used in the cuts conventional) can minimize these problems. (23) in addition, the selection of appropriate thresholds for the low densities that represent areas hiperaeradas is crucial (-1000 to -950UH; -950 900 UH; -930 UH; or < -900 hu), and this selection varies a lot between different studies. (4,9,20,24,25) The lack of consensus on the threshold attenuation gives by a lack of standardization of the parameters of the TC. This study has some limitations. The SISDEP was employed in a small number of images, acquired from the same ct scanner and following the algorithm of reconstruction commonly used in high-resolution images. In addition, it was used the filter to sharpen the edges by the time of the acquisition and processing of images. This type of processing changes the attenuation coefficient, especially at the interfaces between structures of densities very different (such as vessels and air spaces), leading to more noise and, eventually, either overestimating the percentage of areas hiperaeradas. (23) future Work is required aiming at the validation of the SISDEP from images obtained on different ct scanner and on devices with multiple detectors,(26) with different degrees of thickness and with different reconstruction algorithms on a larger number of images. The clinical relevance of this work lies in the possibility of application of the SISDEP in the early diagnosis of COPD, assessment of its progression, in the selection of the ideal candidate reduction surgery for emphysema, and even in research for the evaluation of the impact of therapeutic interventions on the emphysema. (27,28) Future work aimed at quantifying volumetric (densitovolumetria) of the areas of pulmonary hiperinsufladas and the evaluation of patterns of spatial organization of the areas of emphysema (cluster analysis) may expand its clinical application and in research. (29,30) it is Concluded that the SISDEP proved to be efficient for the segmentation of the lungs in the images of HRCT, with excellent correlation with the system Osiris in the extraction of quantitative data of aeration of the lung. The SISDEP presents itself as a promising computational tool that adds to the HRCT possibilities of quantitative analysis in the automatic mode and semi-automatic for better diagnostic evaluation and monitoring of the evolution of emphysema in patients with COPD. 