ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Intracoronary Ultrasound (IVUS) has been used as an auxiliary method to optimize stent implantation. However, the impact of such method on some results is controversial. OBJECTIVE: To systematically analyze the impact of the coronary stents guided by IVUS in comparison to stents guided angiographically on clinical and angiographic results. METHODS: A search was made on databases (MEDLINE, Cochrane CENTRAL, EMBASE) and references of studies published between 1982 and 2010. They included randomized clinical trials (RCTs) that compared the implantation of coronary stents guided by angiography and IVUS versus coronary stent implantation guided only by angiography (ANGIO). The minimum follow-up was six months and the results evaluated were major adverse cardiac events (MACE), Target injury Revascularization (TLR) and angiographic restenosis. Two reviewers extracted the data independently. Summary risk ratios and confidence intervals 95% (CI) were calculated with models with random effects. The GRADE approach was used to determine the overall quality of evidences in each outcome. RESULTS: Out of the 3,631 articles identified eight RCTs evaluating a total of 2,341 patients were included. There was a 27% reduction in angiographic restenosis (95% CI: 3% -46%) and a 38% reduction in TLR (95% CI: 17% -53%) in favor of IVUS vs. ANGIO. However, The MACE were not reduced by IVUS (RR 0.79; 95% CI: 0.61 to 1.03). The MACE data represent only 47% of the optimal size of information required to reliably detect a plausible treatment effect. CONCLUSIONS: We observed that coronary stenting guided by IVUS offers significant reductions in TLR and angiographic restenosis compared with stenting guided by angiography, but does not reduce MACE cases. Keywords: Ultrasonography intervention /use meta-analysis, randomized controlled clinical trials.     Introduction The coronary stent implantation represents the main percutaneous revascularization method in current practice because it reduces restenosis and major adverse cardiac events (MACE) 1 when compared to balloon angioplasty. To assess the adequacy of stent implantation during the procedure, it is possible to use the quantitative coronary angiography and intracoronary ultrasound (IVUS). Compared with the procedure guided by ultrasound intracoronary, the first method is cheaper, easier to implement and available in all centers. On the other hand, IVUS can provide important additional diagnostic information that was not evaluated by an angiography. After percutaneous coronary intervention, restenosis rates are strongly influenced by a small luminal diameter and reduced cross-sectional area of the treated artery. The conceptual framework for the hypothesis that PCI guided by IVUS result in better angiographic results and long-term clinical when compared to the standard strategy (procedures guided only by angiography), is based on the observation that the examination of USIC after stenting allows a safe and controlled aggressive post-dilatation with large final diameters 2,3. Colombo et al 4 were among the first to show that coronary stenting guided by IVUS is safe, feasible and provides a better juxtaposition of the vascular wall to the prosthesis than the result obtained in without IVUS procedure. In his seminal work, USIC was used to guide the implantation of coronary stent that was associated with greater luminal diameter end and lower residual stenosis compared with no use of IVUS during the procedure, with a significant reduction in stroke rates. Subsequent studies showed similar results 5,6 and also indicated beneficial effects of IVUS in cases of MACE6,7. However, other authors showed no major clinical benefits of intravascular ultrasound guided stent implant8,9. In the last decade, a number of observational and randomized studies have investigated the benefit of stent guided by IVUS in long-term results, but these studies have samples of small and conflicting results. This study evaluated the impact of routine implantation of coronary stent guided by IVUS in clinical and angiographic results of long-term through a systematic review of randomized controlled trials.   Methods Eligibility criteria were included RCTs (RCTs) that compared coronary stenting guided by more ultrasound angiography intracoronary (hereinafter USIC) versus coronary stenting guided only by angiography (hereinafter ANGIO) in patients with symptomatic coronary injury or silent ischemia, having assessed the following results: MACE, revascularization and / or angiographic restenosis. Trials with less than six months follow-up were excluded. In cases of tests with several publications (or substudies), the study was included only once. Search strategy and study selection
We searched in an independently and duplicated way in the period between 1982 and March 2010, the following electronic databases: MEDLINE (accessed through PubMed), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (Cochrane CENTRAL) and EMBASE. In addition, we searched the references of published studies. The research was done in March 2010 and consisted of the following terms: "intravascular ultrasound", "IVUS", "IVUS", "coronary artery disease" associated with a high sensitivity strategy for the search randomizados10 clinical trials. Searches were done basically by using articles in English, Spanish and Portuguese. Detailed strategies may be available upon request. Data Extraction The titles and abstracts of all articles identified by the search strategy were evaluated independently by two researchers (GS and APA), Duplicate medium. None of the summaries provided enough information about the selected inclusion and exclusion criteria for the evaluation of the full text. In the second phase, the same reviewers independently assessed the full articles and made their selection according to the eligibility criteria. Disagreements between reviewers were solved by consensus and in case of continuing disagreement, the evaluation was made by a third reviewer (ASQ). To avoid possible double counting of patients included in more than one report by the same authors / working groups, periods of patient recruitment and areas of recruitment were evaluated, and the authors were contacted for clarification. If the required data was not found in the published report, its author was contacted to provide the missing data. Two reviewers (GS and RAR) led, independently, the extraction of data regarding the characteristics of the methodological studies, interventions, and outcomes by standard forms; disagreements were solved by consensus or by a third reviewer (ASQ). The extracted primary endpoint was MACE, defined as death, myocardial infarction or revascularization procedure [as defined by the authors, including Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (new PCI), Coronary artery bypass surgery Grafting (CABG) Vessel Revascularization Target (RVA) or target lesion revascularization (TLR)]. (Table 1). Furthermore, the angiographic restenosis (defined as diameter stenosis > 50% in six months), and all MACE components described above were also analyzed individually as a secondary parameter. Bias risk assessment The assessment of study quality included the generation sequence, allocation concealment, blinding of the evaluators of the results, the use of intention to treat analysis and description of losses and exclusions. Studies without a clear description of an appropriate sequence generation were considered to not have met those criteria. It was considered that the lack of description of how the allocation list was concealed (which may include terms such as "central", "web-based" or "telephone randomization", or a clear statement that the allocation list was hidden) characterized absence of allocation concealment. The use of intention to treat analysis was considered as confirmation of the evaluation study that the number of participants randomized and analyzed were identical, except for patients who have lost the follow-up or who withdrew their consent to participate in the study. It was considered that studies without this feature had not met this criterion. Quality assessment was performed independently by two reviewers (GS and RAR). Data analysis The index summary risk (RR) and confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated using random effects models (Mantel-Haenszel) according to the number of events reported in the analysis of intention to treat the original studies or sub-studies. The analysis of the case available11 was used for the result of angiographic restenosis. For this result, the sensitivity analysis was conducted considering the analysis of intention to treat. Statistical heterogeneity of treatment effects between studies was assessed using the Cochran Q test and the inconsistency by I2 test, it was considered that values above 25% and 50% showed moderate heterogeneity and high, respectively.12. All analyses were performed using Review Manager version 5.0 (Cochrane Collaboration) 13. Sensitivity analyses were carried out considering the methodological characteristics of the studies (intent to treat analysis, proper generation sequence, allocation concealment and blinding of outcome assessors). The authors had full access to data and assumed full responsibility for its integrity. All authors have given their approval for the submission of the final manuscript. Summary of the results: We present the overall quality of the evidence using the GRADE approach as recommended by the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. For each specific outcome, the quality of evidence was based on five factors: (1) limitations of the study design; (2) consistency of results; (3) objectivity; (4) accuracy and (5) publication bias potential. The quality level was reduced by one for each of the unmet factors. The GRADE approach resulted in four quality levels of evidence: high, moderate, low and very low14. The GRADE software profiler (version 3.2) was used15. Reliability and conclusiveness of data, The optimal sizing of the available information of evidences about the stent implant IVUS vs. ANGIO is based on the composite result of MACE16,17. The sample size required for a reliable and conclusive meta-analysis would be the required size for an ideal single RCT fed, then calculate the sample size ideal for our meta-analysis. We use this ideal dimension of information as a way to determine whether the evidence in our meta-analysis was reliable and conclusive.   Results Description of studies from 3,631 potentially relevant citations retrieved from electronic databases and research reference lists eight RCT5-9,18-20 met the inclusion criteria. Figure 1 shows the flow diagram studies in this review. The included studies had a total of 2,397 patients (1,182 in the stenting group guided by IVUS). Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of these studies. Risk of bias Of the studies included, 37% were generating proper sequence, 62% reported allocation concealment, 62% had blinded evaluation of the results, 87% reported losses of follow-up and exclusions, and 100% used the principle of intention analysis treat for statistical analysis (Table 2). Effects of interventions Primary Parameter: major adverse cardiac events Seven artigos5-9,18,19 (n = 2,186) evaluated MACE (Figure 2). The stenting guided by IVUS was associated with a nonsignificant 21% reduction of MACE compared to stenting guided by ANGIO (RR: 0.79; 95% CI: 0.61 to 1.03; I2: 44%). Based on the GRADE of approach, the quality of evidence for this result was considered low, mainly because of the vagueness and inconsistency of results (Table 3). Analyzing the results individually, we found that stenting guided by IVUS was associated with a nonsignificant 35% increase in mortality from all causes 5-9,18-20 (RR: 1.35; 95% CI: 0.73 -2.48; I2: 0%) and a significant 39% reduction in myocardial infarction 5-9,18,19 (RR: 0.61; 95% CI: 0:29 to 1:26; I2: 37%) compared with stenting guided by ANGIO (fig. 2). Based on the GRADE approach, the overall quality of the evidence presented was moderate for mortality by all causes (based on the inaccuracy of the results) and low for myocardial infarction (based on inaccuracy and inconsistency of results) (Table 3). Secondary parameters angiographic restenosis Image 3 shows a comparison between the stent implant guided by IVUS vs. ANGIO compared with angiographic restenosis5-8,18,20 
. The strategy guided by IVUS determined a 27% reduction in angiographic restenosis (RR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.54-0.97; I2: 51%). The number of patients needing treatment (NNT) Iara avoid angiographic restenosis was 11. According to the GRADE approach, the quality of evidence for this result is presented moderate based on the inconsistency of the results obtained in this analysis (Table 3). Revascularization of the target lesion and target vessel revascularization Five ECR5,6,9,18,19 evaluated TLR and two articles 5,7 evaluated RVA (Figure 4). There was a 38% reduction in cases of RLA (RR: 0.62; 95% CI: 0.47 to 0.83; I2: 0%) in patients undergoing stenting guided by IVUS vs. ANGIO. The NNT to prevent one TLR was 20. Based on the GRADE approach, the evidence for TLR was of high quality (Table 3). Furthermore, there was a nonsignificant 42% reduction in cases of TVR (RR: 0.58; 95% CI: 0.30 to 1.12; I2: 0%) in favor of the USIC. According to the GRADE approach there was no evidence of moderate quality for this result based on the imprecision of the results (Table 3). New procedures for percutaneous coronary intervention and coronary artery bypass grafting Two artigos7,8 evaluated new PCI and three assessed miocárdica7,9 revascularization. The stent implantation guided by IVUS determined a non significant decrease of 43% in the case of re-PCI (RR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.16 to 2.01; I2: 84%) and a non-significant reduction 4% in the case of coronary artery bypass surgery (RR: 0.96; 95% CI: 0.52 to 1.77; I2: 0%) compared to stenting guided by ANGIO. Based on the GRADE approach, re-PCI and CABG showed very low and moderate quality of evidence, respectively (Table 3). Reliability and conclusiveness of data To determine the optimal size of information, we assume an event rate in the control group 20% (to the control event rate in our meta-analysis for MACE) and a relative risk reduction of 20%, with power 90% and bilateral 0.01. This calculation indicates that the optimal size of information required to reliably detect a plausible treatment effect for this outcome is at least 4,655 patients. Sensitivity analyzes Sensitivity analyzes were performed for the results, MACE and angiographic restenosis. For MACE, it was not performed sensitivity analysis considering the intention to treat it, due to the fact that all studies included in this meta-analysis included this methodological characteristic. About the concealment of allocation, studies of Frey et al 18 and Oemrawsingh et al 6 were removed from the meta-analysis because it did not meet the criterion, although the result of the analysis remain unchanged (RR: 0.85, 95% CI: 0 64 -1.13; I2: 35%). We also observed the same pattern relative to the adequate description of randomisation sequence, when, after the withdrawal of studies5,6,8,19 that did not meet this characteristic, there was no change in the result of the analysis (RR: 0.83, 95 % CI: 0.63 to 1.09, I2: 36%). Moreover, considering the blinding of the evaluators of the results, two articles 7,19 were removed from the meta-analysis and there was no difference in the outcome (RR: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.59 to 1.11; I2: 52%). With the withdrawal of the study using pharmacological19 stents from the analysis, no change was observed in the results (RR: 0.76, 95% CI: 0.57 to 1.03; I2: 53%). The result of restenosis was made using the available case analysis. Therefore, we performed a sensitivity analysis using it with the intention to treat by data imputation 11. For this result, the non using of the intention to treat analysis, by the authors, did not influence the outcome of the meta-analysis (RR: 0.80, 95% CI: 0.64 to 0.98; I2: 45%).   Discussion In this current paper, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the impact of coronary stent implantation guided by IVUS in long-term results. Our results showed a significant reduction of 38% in cases of RLA and 27% in angiographic restenosis with this strategy, but no statistically significant difference in all cases of MACE, death or myocardial stroke. In practice the current interventional cardiology, the penetration of USIC has performed on a very heterogeneous way, according to the experience and preference of each health center and each surgeon. The most recent Guidelines for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention attribute class IIa level of evidence B recommendation for coronary stenting guided by USIC21. Our results may serve to strengthen this recommendation, given that angiographic and clinical restenosis were significantly reduced with the use of IVUS. The cost of this technology, however, must also be taken into account. Considering the NNT to avoid RLA (20) and the additional cost to include the USIC in a PCI procedure (around R $ 2,000), would require R$ 40,000 to avoid RLA. It is also important to consider whether the IVUS should be done in all patients or only in those at high risk of restenosis. Our analysis does not provide any information about the existence of subgroups with greater benefits, but suggests that patients with greater complexity may benefit more. The cost-effectiveness of interventions to reduce the repetition of revascularization is also favorable in those with elevated baseline risk of restenosis22. Currently, drug-eluting stents are recommended for the reduction of restenosis / reocclusion, provided that there is no contraindication to prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy23-26. Our study did not address the question of whether the routine stent implantation guided by IVUS is better than angiography alone when a drug-eluting stent is implanted19. Although some restenosis predictors, the implementation of drug-eluting stents or simple metal stents are similar 27,28, the extrapolation of data from one population to another may not be appropriate. However, one should consider our results that not all patients, in the daily practice, are good candidates to receive a drug-eluting stent. Patients with contraindications or poor adherence to long-term dual antiplatelet therapy, non-cardiac surgery planned and comorbidities associated with high risk of bleeding represent some of situações24,29-32. Sensitivity analyzes did not change the overall results of the meta-analysis. Frey and cols.18 conducted a randomized clinical trial with provisional stenting guided by IVUS versus conventional treatment, but not all patients received stenting. We decided to include this test in this meta-analysis, and sensitivity analysis that promoted the removal of this study did not change the results for MACE, death, myocardial infarction, angiographic restenosis and TLR. The study by Jakabcin et al 19 adopted routine implantation of drug-eluting stents per protocol. So we also decided to include the data from this trial. In sensitivity analysis where this study was removed, the results did not change. Our study has several strengths from a methodological point of view, namely: 1. targeted review questions; 2. comprehensive literature search and systematic; and 3. The collaboration of a multidisciplinary team of interventional cardiologists, health researchers and methodologists, who used explicit and reproducible eligibility criteria and doubled highly independent and reproducible eligibility decisions, and data abstractions. The meta-analysis was used to quantitatively express the results and evaluate the quality of evidence for each outcome analyzed. Another important strong point of this report is to calculate the sample size (number of ideal information) necessary for our meta-analysis to determine whether the evidence presented in our meta-analysis were reliable and conclusive. Casella et al 33 also conducted a meta-analysis in this field, which was published many years ago. The work consisted only of five RCT (n = 1.883), whereas this revision consisted of three additional RCT, totaling eight trials (n = 2.341). Considering only the analysis of the RCT from the first review33, stent implants guided by IVUS did not reduce cases of MACE (OR: 0.82, 95% CI: 0.64 to 1.04), death (OR: 1.27 95% CI: 0.47 to 3.42) or myocardial infarction (oR 0.96, 95% CI: 0.59 to 1.56), similarly to the results of this study. However, we did not observe lower restenosis rates with stenting guided by IVUS compared to stenting guided by angiography, which was not reported by Casella et al 33 (OR: 0.81, 95% CI: 0, 62 to 1.06). It should be noted that our systematic review included only ERC and the greatest number of studies in comparison with the study of Casella et al 33, which may have contributed to a better estimate of the data found by our group. Parise and cols.34 also conducted a systematic review of this topic recently. In his article, the results related to restenosis were similar, but the authors also found a benefit of IVUS in reducing the incidence of MACE (OR 0.72, 95% CI.52-.99), which was not presented in our analysis. The main difference between these two meta-analyzes is the omission of MACE cases data in the RESIST trial in our calculation 20, which, in its publication, did not present the definition of MACE. In fact, a secondary publication of the essay suggests that the numbers used by Parise et al 34 in his article included only revascularization and death, which does not insert our definition (and the definition of other tests) MACE, which included myocardial miocárdio35. Moreover, our analysis based on the GRADE approach suggest low quality evidence for this result, and our calculation of the optimal number of information show that the question of the benefit of IVUS regarding MACE is far from being answered properly. Some existing limitations in this study deserve to be highlighted. First, most of the studies included in our systematic review may not represent the practice of the current ICP, considering that the stents used in the tests are stents currently employed. ICP techniques have changed considerably, interventional cardiologists have more experience today than before, antiplatelet therapy is more aggressive and the complexity of the cases aumentou25. In addition, the sample size was not ideal, given that the total amount of data available on MACE is only 47% of the ideal number of information necessary to detect with reliability a plausible treatment effect. However, more studies with a larger number of patients, the stenting guided implant by IVUS can significantly reduce MACE cases, given that the p value for this analysis was 0.08.   Conclusions A systematic review and meta-analysis shows that stent implantation guided by IVUS reduces angiographic restenosis and TLR compared to stent implantation guided by angiography, but does not reduce MACE cases. These data can provide a greater support to the use of IVUS, but the performing of RCTs of larger scale and high quality is required in order to elucidate the possible benefit of IVUS compared to hard endpoints. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study was partially funded by CNPq and CAPES. Academic not associated to this study of graduate programs.   