 SUMMARY background: Ultrasound Intracoronariano (USIC) has been used as an auxiliary method in order to optimize implantation of stents. However, the impact of this method on some of the results is controversial. OBJECTIVE: to systematically Analyze the impact of stents for coronary guided by USIC, in comparison with the stents guided angiograficamente on the results of clinical and angiographic. METHODS: we performed a search in databases (MEDLINE, Cochrane CENTRAL, EMBASE and references from studies published between 1982 and 2010. Included were Randomized controlled Trials (ECR), which compared the implantation of stents coronary artery guided by angiography and USIC versus stent implantation coronary guided only by angiography (ANGIO). The follow-up to a minimum of six months and the outcomes assessed were cardiac events significant adverse (MACE), Revascularization of the target Lesion (RLA) and restenosis angiográfica. Two reviewers extracted the data independently. Reason risk summary and confidence intervals of 95% (CI) were calculated using models with random effects. The approach to the GRID was used to determine the overall quality of evidence for each outcome. RESULTS: Of 3.631 articles identified, eight ECR evaluating a total of 2.341 patients were included. There was a 27% reduction in restenosis angiográfica (95% CI: 3% -46%) and a 38% reduction in RLA (95% CI: 17% -53%) in favor of USIC versus ANGIO. However, MACE were not reduced by USIC (RR: 0,79; 95%CI: 0,61-1,03). The data MACE represent only 47% of the optimal size of information required to reliably detect a treatment effect plausible. CONCLUSIONS: we Observed that the coronary stenting guided by USIC offers significant reductions in RLA and restenosis angiográfica compared with stenting guided by angiography, but does not reduce cases of MACE. Key words: Ultrasound-guided intervention / use, meta-analysis, controlled clinical trials random. Introduction coronary stenting represents the primary method of revascularization percutaneous in current practice, because it reduces restenosis and cardiac events significant adverse (MACE)1 when compared to balloon angioplasty. To assess the adequacy of deployment of the stent during the procedure, you can use the coronary angiography and quantitative ultrasound intracoronariano (USIC). In comparison with the procedure guided by ultrasound intracoronariano, the first method is cheaper, easier to perform and available in all centres. On the other hand, the USIC can provide diagnostic information additional important, not assessed by angiography. After percutaneous coronary intervention, the rates of restenosis are strongly influenced by a small diameter, luminal area and the sectional cross-sectional reduced artery treated. The conceptual framework for the hypothesis that percutaneous coronary intervention guided by the USIC would result in better outcomes angiographic and clinical long-term, when compared to the standard strategy (procedures guided only by angiography), based on the observation that the examination of USIC after implantation of the stent allows for a post-dilation aggressive safe and controlled manner with large diameters finais2,3. Columbus and cols.4 were among the first to show that coronary stenting guided by USIC is safe, feasible and provides better juxtaposition of the prosthesis to the vascular wall than the result obtained in the procedure without USIC. In his seminal work, the USIC used to guide the implantation of the stent the coronary artery was associated with larger-diameter luminal end and the lower stenosis residual in comparison with the non-use of USIC during the procedure, with a significant reduction in the rates of thrombosis. Subsequent studies showed results semelhantes5,6 and also indicated the beneficial effects of the USIC in the cases of MACE6,7. However, other authors did not show major clinical benefits of ultrasound intravascular guided implant stent8,9. In the last decade, a series of observational studies and randomized trials have investigated the benefit of stent guided by USIC on long-term results, but these studies have small sample sizes and conflicting results. In this study we assess the impact of the deployment routine stent coronary artery guided by USIC on the clinical outcomes and angiographic long-term by means of a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. Methods eligibility Criteria Were included Randomized controlled Trials (ECR) that compared coronary stenting guided by angiography more ultrasound intracoronário (hereinafter referred to USIC) versus coronary stenting guided only by angiography (hereinafter referred to as ANGIO) in patients with preoperative coronary symptomatic or ischemia silent, having assessed the following results: MACE, revascularization, and/or restenosis angiográfica. Trials with follow-up less than six months were excluded. In cases of trials with multiple publications (or sub-studies), the study was included only once. Search strategy and study selection We searched independently and in duplicate, in the period between 1982 and march 2010, the following electronic databases: MEDLINE (accessed by PubMed), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (Cochrane CENTRAL) and EMBASE. In addition, we seek out the references of published studies. The survey was conducted in march 2010 and was composed by the following terms: "intravascular ultrasound", "ultrasound intracoronário", "USIC", "coronary artery disease", associated with a strategy of high sensitivity for the search of clinical trials randomizados10. The search was limited to articles in English, Spanish and Portuguese. The detailed strategies used can be made available upon request. Data extraction The titles and abstracts of all articles identified by the search strategy were assessed independently by two investigators (G. S. and A. P. A. ), duplicated. None of the abstracts provided enough information about the inclusion and exclusion criteria selected for the evaluation of the full text. In the second phase, the same reviewers independently evaluated the articles in their entirety and made their selection in accordance with the eligibility criteria. Disagreements between the reviewers were resolved by consensus, and in cases of persistence of the disagreement, the evaluation was made by a third reviewer (A. S. Q.). To avoid possible double counting of patients included in more than one report of the same authors/working groups, we assessed the periods of recruitment of patients and the areas of recruiting, and the authors were contacted for clarification. If they could not be found in the published report the necessary data, the corresponding author was contacted to provide the missing data. Two reviewers (G. S., and R. A. R.) led, independently, the extraction of the data in respect to the methodological characteristics of the studies, interventions and results by using standardized forms; disagreements were resolved by consensus or by a third reviewer (A. S. Q.). The primary parameter extracted was the MACE, defined as death, myocardial infarction or coronary artery bypass [as stated by the authors, including Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (new ICP), coronary artery Bypass grafting Surgery surgical (CRM), Revascularization of the Vessel, the Target (AVR) or coronary artery bypass of the lesion target (RLA)]. (Table 1). In addition, the restenosis angiográfica (defined as a stenosis diameter >50% in six months), as well as all of the components of MACE described above were also analyzed individually and as a parameter of secondary importance. Assessment of risk of bias quality assessment study included the generation of the sequence, concealment of allocation, blinding of the assessors of the results, the use of analysis intention-to-treat, and description of losses and exclusions. Studies without a clear description of a generation the proper sequence were considered as not having met these criteria. It was considered that the lack of description of how the list allocation was concealed (which may include terms such as "central", "web-based" or "randomization by telephone", or a clear statement that the list allocation was concealed) characterized the absence of concealment of allocation. The use of the analysis intention-to-treat was considered as a confirmation about the evaluation study that the number of participants randomized and analyzed were identical, except for the patients who lost follow-up or who withdrew their consent for participation in the study. It was considered that studies without this characteristic had not met this criterion. The quality assessment was performed independently by two reviewers (G. S., and R. A. R.). Data analysis The indices of risk summary (RR) and confidence intervals 95% (CI) were calculated with models of random effect (Mantel-Haenszel) according to the number of events reported in the analysis of intention-to-treat of original studies or sub-studies. For the outcome of restenosis angiográfica, has been used for the analysis of the case disponível11. To this result, the sensitivity analysis was carried out considering the analysis of intention-to-treat. The heterogeneity statistic of treatment effects between studies was assessed by the test of Cochran's Q and the inconsistency test I2, in which it is considered that values above 25%, and 50% indicated heterogeneity moderate to high, respectivamente12. All analyses were performed using the Review Manager version 5.0 (Cochrane Collaboration)13. Sensitivity analyses were conducted considering the methodological characteristics of the studies (analysis of intention-to-treat, generation of the proper sequence, allocation concealment and blinding of assessors of outcomes). The authors had full access to the data and took full responsibility for its integrity. All authors gave their approval for the submission of the final manuscript. Summary of results we Present the overall quality of the evidence using the approach GRADE as recommended by the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. For each specific result, the quality of the evidence was based on five factors: (1) limitations of the study design; (2) the consistency of the results; (3) objectivity; (4) precision, and (5) potential for publication bias. The quality was reduced by one level for each of the factors not met. The approach to the GRID resulted in four levels of quality of evidence: high, moderate, low and very baixa14. The software GRID Profiler (version 3.2) was utilizado15. Reliability and conclusividade of the data, The design ideal of the information of the available evidence on the implantation of the stent by USIC vs. ANGIO was based on the composite result of MACE16,17. The sample size required for a meta-analysis reliable and conclusive would be the size needed for an ECR single ideal fed, we then calculate the sample size ideal for our meta-analysis. We use this dimension to the ideal of information as a way to determine if the evidence in our meta-analysis were reliable and conclusive. Results Description of studies 3.631 citations potentially relevant retrieved from electronic databases and searches of reference lists, eight RCT5-9,18-20 met the inclusion criteria. Figure 1 shows the flow diagram of studies in this review. The studies included had a total of 2.397 patients (1.182 in the group of stenting guided by USIC). Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of these studies. Risk of bias Of the included studies, 37% showed generation of the proper sequence, 62% reported concealment of allocation, 62% had blinded assessment of results, 87% described losses to follow-up and exclusions, and 100% used the principle of analysis for intention-to-treat for the statistical analyses (Table 2). Effects of interventions primary Parameter: cardiac events adverse important Seven artigos5-9,18,19 (n = 2,186) evaluated MACE (Figure 2). The stent implantation guided by USIC was associated with a reduction in non-significant 21% of MACE compared with stenting guided by ANGIO (RR: 0,79; 95% CI: 0,61-1,03; I2: 44%). Based on the approach GRADE, the quality of the evidence for this outcome was considered to be low, mainly because of the vagueness and inconsistency of the results (Table 3). Analyzing the results individually, we observed that stenting guided by USIC was associated with an increase non-significant 35% in mortality from all causas5-9,18-20 (RR: 1.35; 95% CI: 0.73-2.48; I2: 0%) and a significant reduction of 39% in the infarction of the miocárdio5-9,18,19 (RR: 0.61; 95% CI: 0.29-1.26; I2: 37%) compared with stenting guided by ANGIO (fig. 2). Based on the approach GRADE, the overall quality of the evidence presented moderate for all-cause mortality (based on the imprecision of results) and low by myocardial infarction (based on the inaccuracy and inconsistency of results) (Table 3). The secondary parameters Restenosis angiográfica figure 3 shows a comparison between stenting guided by USIC versus ANGIO in comparison with the restenosis angiográfica5-8,18,20. The strategy is guided by USIC has determined a 27% reduction in restenosis angiográfica (RR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.54-0.97; I2: 51%). The number of patients needed to treat (NNT) iara prevent restenosis angiográfica was 11. According to the approach GRADE, the quality of the evidence for this outcome was presented moderate based on the inconsistency of the results obtained in this analysis (Table 3). Revascularization of the lesion target, and revascularization of the vessel, the Five target ECR5,6,9,18,19 evaluated RLA and two artigos5,7 have evaluated the RVA (Figure 4). There was a 38% reduction in cases of RLA (RR: 0,62; 95% CI: 0,47-0,83; I2: 0%) in patients who underwent stent implantation guided by USIC versus ANGIO. The NNT to prevent a RLA was 20. Based on the approach GRADE, the evidence for RLA was of high quality (Table 3). In addition, there was a reduction, not significant 42% in the cases of RVA (RR: 0,58; 95% CI: 0,30-1,12; I2: 0%) in favor of the USIC. According to the approach GRADE, there was moderate quality evidence for this result based on the inaccuracy of the results (Table 3). New procedures of percutaneous coronary intervention and coronary artery bypass grafting surgery Two artigos7,8 evaluated new ICP and three assessed the revascularization surgery miocárdica7,9. The stent implantation guided by USIC has determined a reduction in non-significant 43% in the cases of re-PCI (RR: 0,57; 95% CI: 0,16-2,01; I2: 84%) and a reduction in non-significant 4% in the cases of coronary artery bypass grafting surgery (RR: 0,96; 95% CI: 0,52-1.77 two; I2: 0%) compared with stenting guided by ANGIO. Based on the approach GRADE, re-PCI and cabg surgery showed evidence of very low quality and moderate, respectively (Table 3). Reliability and conclusividade of the data To determine the ideal size of information, we assumed an event rate in controls of 20% (the rate of event in controls in our meta-analysis for MACE) and a reduction in the relative risk by 20%, with a power of 90% and α of the bilateral 0.01. This calculation indicates that the ideal size of information required to reliably detect a treatment effect plausible explanation for this result is at least 4.655 patients. Sensitivity analyses sensitivity analyses were carried out for the results, MACE and restenosis angiográfica. For MACE, it was not carried out sensitivity analysis considering the analysis of intention-to-treat, due to the fact that all the studies included in this meta-analysis included this characteristic methodology. About allocation concealment, the studies of Frey and cols.18 and Oemrawsingh and colleagues.6 were removed from the meta-analysis because it did not meet the criterion, although the result of the analysis remain unchanged (RR: 0,85, 95% CI: 0.64 in -1,13; I2: 35%). We also observed the same pattern in relation to the adequate description of the sequence of randomization, when, after the removal of the estudos5,6,8,19 which did not address this characteristic, there was no change in the result of the analysis (RR: 0,83, 95% CI: 0,63-1,09, I2: 36%). In addition, considering the blinding of the assessors of the results, two artigos7,19 were removed from the meta-analysis and there was no difference in the result (RR: 0,81, 95% CI: 0,59-1,11; I2: 52%). With the withdrawal of the study using stents farmacológicos19 from the analysis, no change was observed in the results (RR: 0.76, CI 95%: 0,57-1,03; I2: 53%). The result of restenosis angiográfica was presented using the case analysis available. Therefore, sensitivity analyses were performed using the analysis of intent to treat by means of the imputation of dados11. To this result, the non-use of the analysis of intention to treat on the part of the authors did not influence the result of the meta-analysis (RR: 0,80, 95% CI: 0,64-0,98; I2: 45%). Discussion In the present article, we conducted a systematic review and a meta-analysis to evaluate the impact of stent implantation coronary guided by USIC on long-term results. Our results demonstrated a significant reduction of 38% in the cases of RLA and 27% in the restenosis angiográfica with this strategy, but no statistically significant difference in the total number of cases of MACE, death or myocardial infarction. In the practice of interventional cardiology, current, penetration of the USIC was quite heterogeneous, according to the experience and preference of each center and each surgeon. The latest Guidelines for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention award the recommendation class IIa level of evidence B for the coronary stenting guided by USIC21. Our results may serve to strengthen this recommendation, in view of that reestenoses angiographic and clinical have been significantly reduced with the employment of USIC. The cost of this technology, however, must also be taken into account. Considering the NNT to avoid a RLA (20) and the additional cost to include the USIC in a procedure of the ICP (around R$ 2 billion), would need to be$ 40 billion to avoid a RLA. It is also important to consider if the USIC should be done in all patients, or only those with high risk of restenosis. Our analysis provides no information about the existence of subgroups with the greatest benefits, however, suggests that patients with a greater complexity can benefit the most. The benefit-cost ratio of interventions designed to reduce the repetition of cabg is also favorable in those with high risk of baseline reestenose22. Currently, the stents pharmacological measures are recommended for the reduction of reestenoses/reoclusão, provided that there is no contraindication to therapies antiplaquetárias double prolongadas23-26. Our study has not addressed the question about whether routine implantation of a stent is guided by the USIC is better than angiography isolated when a stent medication is implantado19. Although some predictors of restenosis in the implantation of stents pharmacological or stents, metal simple to be similares27,28, the extrapolation of data from one population to another may not be appropriate. However, we should consider in our results that not all patients, in daily practice, will be good candidates to receive a stent therapy. Patients with contraindications or poor adherence to therapy antiplaquetária dual long-term, surgery not heart planned and comorbidities associated with high risk of bleeding represent some of these situações24,29-32. The sensitivity analyses performed did not change the overall results of the meta-analysis. Frey and cols.18 performed a randomized clinical trial with stenting provisional guided by USIC versus conventional treatment, but not all patients received the implant of the stent. We decided to include this trial in the meta-analysis, and sensitivity analysis that promoted the removal of this study did not change the results for MACE, mortality, myocardial infarction, restenosis angiográfica and RLA. The study by Jakabcin and cols.19 adopted implant routine stent pharmacological protocol. Thus, we also decided to include the data in this test. In the sensitivity analysis where this study was removed, the results did not change. Our study has several strengths from a methodological point of view, namely: 1. Questions directed to the review; 2. Literature search a comprehensive and systematic manner; and 3. The collaboration of a multidisciplinary team of cardiologists interventional, researchers and health metodólogos, who used eligibility criteria explicit and reproducible and have doubled in decisions of eligibility highly independent and reproducible, in addition to abstractions of data. Meta-analysis has been used to express quantitatively the results obtained and to evaluate the quality of evidence for each outcome analyzed. Another strong point important about this report is that we estimate the sample size (ideal number of information) necessary for our meta-analysis to determine if the evidence presented in our meta-analysis were reliable and conclusive. Casella and cols.33 also conducted a meta-analysis in this field, which was published many years ago. The work consisted only of five ECR (n = 1.883), whereas the present review consisted of three ECR additional, for a total of eight clinical trials (n = 2.341). Considering only the analysis of the ECR of the first revisão33, the stent implantation guided by USIC has not reduced the cases of MACE (OR: 0,82, 95% CI: 0,64-1,04), deaths (OR: 1,27, 95% CI: 0,47-3,42) or myocardial infarction (OR: 0,96, 95% CI: 0,59-1,56), similar to the results of the present study. However, we do not observe lower rates of restenosis with stenting guided by USIC in comparison to stenting guided by angiography, which was not reported by Casella and cols.33 (OR: 0,81, 95% CI: 0,62-1,06). It should be noted that our systematic review included only ERC and had a greater number of studies in comparison with the study of Casella and cols.33, which must have contributed to a better estimate of the data found by our group. Parise and cols.34 also carried out a systematic review of this topic recently. In his article, the results related to restenosis were similar, but the authors also found a benefit of USIC in the reduction of cases of MACE (OR A 0.72, 95% CI 0,52-0,99), which was not presented in our analysis. The main difference between these two meta-analyses is the omission of the data of cases of MACE in the test RESIST in our cálculos20, which, on its publication, it is not presented the definition of MACE. In fact, a publication of the secondary of the test suggests that the numbers used by Parise and colleagues.34 in his article included only coronary artery bypass grafting and death, which does not enter into our definition (and the definition of other tests), of MACE, which included myocardial of miocárdio35. Furthermore, our analysis based on the approach the GRID suggests evidence of low quality for this outcome, and our estimate of the optimal number of information shows that the question about the benefit of USIC in relation to the MACE is far from being answered. Some of the present limitations in our study deserve to be highlighted. First, the majority of the studies included in our systematic review may not represent the practice of ICP current, considering that the stents used in the trials are the stents used today. Techniques of ICP have changed considerably, cardiologists interventional have more experience today than ever before, the therapy antiplaquetária is more aggressive and the complexity of the cases aumentou25. In addition, the sample size was not ideal, given that the total amount of data available about MACE represents only 47% of the ideal number of information needed to detect, with reliability, a treatment effect plausible. However, with more studies with a larger number of patients, the stent implantation guided by USIC can significantly reduce the cases of MACE, with a view that the p value for this analysis was 0,08. Conclusions This systematic review and meta-analysis demonstrates that stent implantation guided by USIC reduces the restenosis angiográfica and RLA in comparison with stenting guided by angiography, but does not reduce the cases of MACE. These data may provide increased support to the use of the USIC, but the realization of ECRs of the largest scale and high quality is required in order to elucidate the possible benefit of USIC in relation to hard endpoints (outcomes hard). Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study was partially funded by CNPq and CAPES. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 