ABSTRACT Background: Anomalous origin of the coronary arteries is a relatively rare entity, and may be presented in various clinical forms and develop adversely. Multislice CT angiography of the coronary arteries is becoming more popular in daily clinical practice, representing an important diagnostic method with great potential in the anatomical evaluation of these arteries. Objective: The objective of this study is to describe the angiotomographic findings and outcome of patients with anomalous origin of coronary arteries. Methods: During the period from January 2008 to March 2011, were consecutively evaluated 404 patients referred to perform coronary angiography for various reasons, with mean follow-up of 21 months. Results: Nine patients (2.2%) had anomalous origin of the coronary arteries, four with anomalous origin of the circumflex artery (Cx) in right coronary artery (CD), two with anomalous origin of the CD (with CD source in Cx, and CD of origin in the left coronary sinus), a patient with single coronary trunk (anterior descending and Cx out of the left coronary sinus), with anomalous path of left main coronary artery between the aorta and pulmonary artery and one patient with coronary trunk left originating from the right coronary sinus. Among the patients, one patient received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; one patient with sudden death during hospitalization; and the other had no complications. Conclusion: multislice CT angiography of the coronary arteries is minimally invasive diagnostic method which detects the origin, course and termination of anomalous origin of the coronary arteries with excellent accuracy, allowing the correct diagnosis and assisting in the treatment planning. Keywords: Congenital heart defects, coronary disease, coronary angiography, coronary arteries, CT angiography.     Introduction The normal anatomy of the coronary arteries can be summarized as described by James in 1961, as the presence of two arterial holes located in central position in the left sinus of Valsalva and right of the aorta, near the free edge of the coronary cusps. The Anomalous origin of coronary artery (OAAC) is a relatively rare entity, and its incidence is estimated at about 1.5% of the population geral1-6. The evolution of OAAC is very variable and can be benign or present potentially serious conditions, such as heart attack and sudden death. Among the available diagnostic methods, multislice CT angiography of the coronary arteries has great potential in the anatomical evaluation of these arteries7 (fig. 1 and 2). The aim of this study is to describe the anatomic findings and outcome of patients with anomalous origin of coronary arteries detected by multislice CT angiography of the coronary arteries.   Methods During the period from January 2008 to March 2011, all patients referred for coronary angiography were cataloged and accompanied (after information and signing the informed consent and informed to participate in the study), totalizing 404 patients. Was used tomograph 64 channels (Aquilion, Toshiba Medical Company, Japan), and the images of the entire heart were acquired in apnea 6-8 seconds intravenous infusion 85-90 mL of iodinated contrast (Iopamiron 350) in pump infusion flow rate of 5 ml / s. Automatic contrast detection ROI was positioned in the descending aorta (150 HU), initiating the acquisition of images. CF patients greater than 70 bpm and without contraindications received 5 mg of intravenous metoprolol. The images were reconstructed with thick slices 0.3 mm to 0.4 mm intervals with retrospective gating. All data were analyzed by physicians experienced in the method, using multiplanar reformatting and 3-D reconstruction technique of the "volume rendering". Patients were followed for contact via telephone or personal interview for an average of 21 months.   Results Of the 404 patients, nine patients were diagnosed with OAAC (2.2%), with a mean age of 50.4 ± 20 years, eight (88%) male (tab. 1). These patients were referred to the ATCM for various reasons, such as chest pain (four patients), altered myocardial scintigraphy (three patients), syncope (one patient) and cardiorespiratory arrest (one patient). With regard to family history, four had a family history of coronary artery disease. There were no reports of other significant family illness. The main findings were angiotomographic (tab. 1): Four with anomalous origin of the Cx CD (fig. 3); Two with anomalous origin of the CD (with CD source on Cx, and one CD of origin in the left coronary sinus); A patients with single coronary trunk (DA and Cx originating from the left sinus (fig. 4)); A patient with left coronary trunk originating from the right coronary sinus (fig. 5); With anomalous TEC path between the aorta and pulmonary artery (Fig. 6). In the evolution (tab. 1), one patient received an implantable cardioverter, evolving without complications, and another patient, who carried out the examination because of atypical chest pain, evolved with sudden death during hospitalization, while awaiting surgery for coronary anomaly correction. The other patients had no complications until the time of completion of this study.   Discussion The normal coronary anatomy is characterized by two orifices located centrally in the sinuses of Valsalva right and left, whose diameter should be equal to or greater than the diameter of the coronary artery which it originates, being universally defined as follows maneira8,9: the coronary trunk originates from the left coronary sinus, usually below the sinotubular junction and usually split in the anterior descending artery and the circumflex artery; in 37% of subjects left coronary trunk presents a trifurcation in Anterior Descending artery (DA), circumflex artery (Cx) and a middle or intermediate branch. The latter usually supplies free wall along the side face of the left ventricle. The anterior descending artery subsequently follows the pulmonary artery in the anterior interventricular groove and features diagonal branches with path toward the anterolateral wall of the left ventricle. The circumflex artery runs in the posterior atrioventricular groove and varies in size and scope depending on the degree of coronary artery dominance. The Cx usually gives rise to a marginal or three branches obtuse, supplying the free wall of the left ventricle. In only 1% of the population, the origins of AD and Cx occur separately in the coronary sinus esquerdo10,11. The Right Coronary artery (RCA) originates from the right coronary sinus and follows the right atrioventricular groove. Its first branch is the conal artery (or infundibular), which runs before supplying the output of the right ventricle or infundibular region. In 50% of the population, the infundibular branch arises separately from the coronary sinus direito7. In 90% of the population, the CD extends posteriorly and gives rise to the posterior descending artery, featuring the "right dominance" system. In 10% of the population the posterior descending artery originates from the circumflex artery and not the CD, featuring the system of "left dominance". Occasionally, a "balanced" system is present when the rear surface is supplied by branches of both arteries, right and left. Another CD branch, found in 59% of individuals is the sinoatrial nodal artery which later evolves along the upper portion of the atrial septum and the anterior wall of the right atrium, supplying the sinus node and the right atrium. In 38% of individuals, this artery originates from the left coronary artery, and 3% stems from both arteries7. Any change in this pattern should be considered as an abnormal coronary anatomy, ie a coronary anomaly should be defined as any coronary pattern with a feature (number of ostia, proximal course, distal bed ...) "rarely" found in general.10 population . This anomaly has a low incidence in the general population, ranging from 0.3% to 6.6%. Alexander and Griffiths in 18,950 autopsies, found only 54 cases of coronary origin anomalies (0.3%); Angelini et al 10 conducted a study that included 1,950 consecutive cardiac catheterization for the evaluation of coronary artery disease, finding an incidence of 5.6%, but these studies were limited because of the input selection of patients and the absence of clear diagnostic criteria. Shi et al 11, using the multislice coronary angiography, have shown an incidence of 6.6%. In the series presented in this study, we observed an incidence of 2.2%. Coronary angiography is currently the most widely used test for the diagnosis of anomalous origin of coronary artery, but this method has limited use for this purpose because of its invasive characteristics and projection analysis. The tomography with 64 channels available for clinical practice an excellent method for the detection of coronary artery anomalies and can detect quick, minimally invasive (used only peripheral vein for contrast administration) and accurately the origin, course and termination of these vessels, and some authors have shown the superiority of the ATCM of the coronary arteries compared to conventional angiography in demonstrating the ostial origin and the proximal course of the coronary arteries anômalas3,12,13. Because of the very nonspecific clinical picture, one should always keep in mind the possibility of OAAC, especially in young athletes because it is a life-threatening disease and is implicated as a cause of chest sudden death pain, heart failure, syncope , dyspnea, ventricular fibrillation and myocardial miocárdio10. The origin and proximal course of anomalous coronary arteries are the main predictors of gravidade14. Currently, it is the second most common cause of sudden death from cardiovascular causes in athletes competitivos15 also may be a cause of heart failure and death in lactentes16,17. With regard to the evolution of patients, we must take into account the limitations of the study, where there was a relatively short period of follow-up (mean 21 months), and the possible anatomical variations. Of the nine patients in this study, there were four presenting circumflex artery coming out of the right coronary artery, is compatible with the literature that shows that the circumflex artery originating from the right coronary sinus or coronary artery with a retroaortic course, is the congenital anomaly of more comum18,19 coronary artery. This anomaly does not have important clinical significance, but should logically be considered before heart surgery. It was also observed a patient with single left coronary artery, where the origin of the right coronary artery occurs from the circumflex artery with retroaortic course, and this patient was admitted to the service after the dramatic picture of cardiac arrest at home, ressussitada by team emergency mobile care service. Despite being the cause of myocardial ischemia, ischemia-inducing tests may be normal. Anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the right coronary sinus (in the series presented found in a patient who presented path between the aorta and pulmonary trunk) may relate to sudden death in 59% of cases, preceded by physical activity in 81% of eventos10 . This anomaly may present four paths: prior to the pulmonary artery; subsequently to the aorta; intrasseptal between the aorta and the pulmonary artery; and interarterial between the aorta and pulmonar20. All subtypes of this anomaly have been associated with sudden death, but the interatrial variation, which is the most common pattern, have a stronger relationship with catastróficas20-22 sequelae. He was also diagnosed a patient with CD the origin of the left coronary sinus with path between the aorta and pulmonary trunk without extrinsic compression, patients who took the exam because of chest pain, and observed abnormal pathway of the left coronary trunk between the aorta and pulmonary artery. This patient developed sudden death during hospitalization, while programming surgery for coronary anomaly correction. It was also observed a patient with single artery: left main coronary artery, where the left coronary sinus gave rise to DA and Cx, this being a very rare anomaly, with an incidence of 0.04% and may be associated with congenital heart defect (tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of great vessels, truncus arteriosus) in 40% of cases. The prognosis of this type of anomaly ranges from excellent (no decrease in survival), reserved as their anatomical distribution, including the risk of sudden death, since 15% of the patients develop severe heart disease before age 40. When developing coronary artery disease, the consequences are significant and the prognosis is severe if the obstruction is proximal, because the ostium is unique and there is minimal possibility of collateral circulation. The indication of revascularization should be considered when symptoms are observed, even in the absence of coronary atherosclerosis, due to the considerable chance of acute myocardial infarction and sudden death. According to current evidence, the coronary segments with abnormal pathway are not more susceptible to atherosclerotic obstructive disease than normal segments in the same indivíduo10,15. We must always keep in mind the possibility of anomalous origin of coronary arteries in patients with chest pain framework, fainting, stroke or other non-specific symptoms, especially when it comes to young people and athletes, and if available, to make use of coronary angiography multislice to the correct diagnosis and treatment of this entity which, if left untreated, could develop adversely.   Conclusion OAAC is a relatively rare entity, potentially lethal if not diagnosed and treated early, may present various clinical forms and develop adversely. The ATCM is minimally invasive diagnostic method which detects the origin, course and termination of anomalous origin of the coronary arteries allowing the correct diagnosis and assisting in the treatment planning.   Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant.   Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources.   Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   