 SUMMARY background: The anomalous origin of the coronary arteries is an entity that is relatively rare, and may present in several clinical forms and develop an adverse effect. The angiotomografia multislice of the coronary arteries has been gaining ground in daily clinical practice, representing an important method for the baccalaureate, with a great potential in the evaluation of anatomical these arteries. Objective: The aim of this study is to describe the findings angiotomográficos and the evolution of patients with anomalous origin of the coronary arteries. Methods: During the period January 2008 to march 2011, were evaluated consecutively in 404 patients referred to the realization of angiotomografia of the coronary arteries for a variety of reasons, with median follow-up of 21 months. Results: Nine patients (2,2%) had anomalous origin of the coronary arteries, four with anomalous origin of artery circunflexa (Cx) Coronary bypass Right (CD), two with anomalous origin of the CD (the one with the source CD in Cx, and a CD source in the coronary sinus to the left), a patient with stem coronary artery (the descending anterior and Cx out of the coronary sinus to the left), a trip to anomalous trunk coronary left between the aorta and the pulmonary artery, and one patient presenting trunk coronary left originating from the coronary sinus right. Of the patients evaluated, one patient received a cardiodesfibrilador implanted; one patient developed sudden death during hospital stay; and the others did not have complications. Conclusion: The angiotomografia multislice of the coronary arteries represents a method for the baccalaureate minimally invasive that allows detecting the origin, course and termination of the anomalies of origin of coronary arteries with excellent accuracy, allowing the correct diagnosis and assisting in treatment planning. Key words: congenital Heart disease, disease of the coronary arteries, coronary angiography, coronary vessels, angiotomografia. Introduction The normal anatomy of the coronary arteries can be summarized as the one described by James in 1961, as the presence of two holes in the artery located in a central position in the sinuses of Valsalva and the left and right of the aorta, close to the free edge of the cusps coronary heart. The Origin of the Anomalous Artery coronary (OAAC) is an entity that is relatively rare, and its incidence is estimated in about 1.5% of the general population1-6. The evolution of the OAAC is very variable, and may be benign or display frames potentially serious, such as heart attack and sudden death. Among the methods propedêuticos available, the angiotomografia multislice of the coronary arteries shows great potential in the evaluation of anatomical of these artérias7 (fig. 1 and 2). The aim of this study is to describe the findings that are anatomical, and the evolution of patients with anomalous origin of the coronary arteries detected by the angiotomografia multislice of the coronary arteries. Methods During the period January 2008 to march 2011, all patients referred to angiotomografia coronary were catalogued and accompanied (upon information and signing the term of free and informed consent to participation in the study), totaling-if 404 patients. Was used ct scanner, 64 channels (Aquilion, Toshiba Medical Company, Japan), and images of the entire heart were acquired in apnea of 6 to 8 seconds, venous infusion of 85 to 90 mL of iodinated contrast (Iopamiron 350), in infusion pump flow rate of 5 mL/s. ROI, automatic detection of the contrast was positioned in the descending aorta (150 HU), starting with the acquisition of images. Patients with HR greater than 70 bpm and no contraindications received 5 mg of metoprolol iv. Images were reconstructed with parting thickness of 0.3 mm at intervals of 0.4 mm, with gating retrospective. All data were analyzed by physicians experienced in the method, using reformatting multiplanar reconstruction and 3-D technology by "volume rendering". The patients were followed by contact via telephone or personal interview for an average time of 21 months. Results Of the 404 patients, were diagnosed in nine patients with OAAC (2.2%), with average age 50.4 ± 20 years, eight (88%) male (tab. 1). These patients were referred to the ATCM for various reasons, such as precordialgia (four patients), myocardial scintigraphy changed (three patients), syncope (one patient), and post-cardiorespiratory arrest (one patient). With regard to the family history, four had positive family history for coronary artery disease. There were no reports of other diseases family significant. The major findings of angiotomográficos were (tab. 1): Four with anomalous origin of the Cx in CD (fig. 3); Two with anomalous origin of the CD (the one with the source CD in Cx, and a CD source in the coronary sinus to the left); A patients with the trunk, the coronary artery single (and Cx originating from the left bosom (fig. 4)); A patient presenting trunk coronary left originating from the coronary sinus right (fig. 5); A trip to anomalous TEC between the aorta and the pulmonary artery (fig. 6). In the evolution (tab. 1), a patient received a cardiodesfibrilador deployable, evolving without complications, and another patient, who performed the examination on the grounds of precordialgia atypical, has evolved with sudden death during hospital stay, while waiting for surgery for correction of the anomaly of the coronary. The other patients showed no complications up until the time of completion of this study. Discussion The coronary anatomy normal is characterized by two ostia located centrally in the sinuses of Valsalva right and left, whose diameter should be equal to or greater than the diameter of the coronary artery which it originates, being universally defined in the following maneira8,9: The stem coronary artery originates from the coronary sinus to the left, usually below the junction sinotubular and usually split in the artery, the descending and artery circunflexa; in 37% of individuals the trunk coronary left presents a trifurcação artery Descending Anterior (DA), artery circunflexa (Cx) and a branch of the median or intermediate. The latter usually supplies the free wall along the side face of the left ventricle. The artery previous downward follows subsequently to the pulmonary trunk, in the sulcus anterior interventricular and displays branches the diagonals with the path in the direction of the wall anterolateral left ventricle. The artery circunflexa follows in the furrow atrioventricular later, and varies in size and extent, depending on the degree of dominance of the coronary artery. Cx usually gives rise to one or three branches, marginal obtuse, supplying the free wall of the left ventricle. In only 1% of the population, the origins of THE and Cx occur separately in the coronary sinus esquerdo10,11. The Right Coronary artery (CD) originates from the coronary sinus and right following the groove atrioventricular right. Its first branch is the artery conal (or infundibular), which commenced earlier by supplying the output of the right ventricle or region infundibular. In 50% of the population, the branch infundibular originates separately from the coronary sinus direito7. In 90% of the population, the CD extends posteriorly and gives rise to the artery descending posterior, featuring the system of the "dominance of the right". In 10% of the population the artery descending posterior originates from the artery circunflexa and not the CD, featuring the system of "dominance" left. Occasionally, a system "balanced" is present when the posterior surface is supplied by branches of both arteries, the right and left. Another branch of the CD, found in 59% of individuals, is the artery sinoatrial nodal that commenced later along the upper portion of the atrial septum and the anterior wall of the right atrium, which supplies the sinus node and the right atrium. In 38% of individuals, this artery originates from the coronary left, and in 3% originates from both the artérias7. Any change in this standard should be considered as a coronary anatomy is abnormal, that is, an anomaly of the coronary should be defined as any standard coronary artery with a feature (number of ostia, path proximal, bed distal...) "rarely" found in the population geral10. This anomaly presents low incidence in the general population, ranging from 0.3% to 6.6%. Alexander and Griffiths, 18.950 necropsy, we observed only 54 cases of anomalous origin of the coronary arteries (0,3%); Angelini and cols.10 conducted a study that included 1.950 cateterismos consecutive heart for the assessment of coronary artery disease, finding an incidence of 5.6%, however these studies were limited due to the selection input of patients and the absence of diagnostic criteria clear. Shi and cols.11, using the angiotomografia multislice coronary, demonstrated an incidence of 6.6%. In the series presented in this study, it was observed an incidence of 2.2%. The coronary angiography is currently the exam used for the diagnosis of anomalous origin of artery, coronary, but this method has limited use for this purpose because of their characteristic invasive analysis and projection. Computed tomography multislice 64 channels provides to clinical practice an excellent method for the detection of anomalies of the coronary arteries, and can detect in a quick, minimally invasive (only used peripheral vein for administration of contrast) and accurate the origin, course and termination of these vessels, and some authors have already shown the superiority of the ATCM of the coronary arteries in relation to angiography conventional in the demonstration of the origin ostial and path of proximal coronary arteries anômalas3,12,13. On the grounds of the clinical picture is very nonspecific, you should always have in mind the possibility of OAAC, especially in young people and athletes, as it is a potentially lethal disease, being implicated as the cause of chest pain, sudden death, heart failure, syncope, dyspnoea, ventricular fibrillation, and myocardial of the miocárdio10. The source and path proximal of the coronary arteries anomalous are the main predictive factors of gravidade14. Currently, it constitutes the second most frequent cause of sudden death of origin the cardiovascular athletes competitivos15, and may also be the cause of heart failure and death in lactentes16,17. In regards to the evolution of patients, we must take into consideration the limitations of the study, where there was a relatively short time of follow-up (mean 21 months), and the possible anatomical variations. Of the nine patients described in this study, there were four featuring artery circunflexa coming out of the coronary right, being consistent with the literature which shows that the artery circunflexa originating from the coronary sinus or right artery coronary right, with a path retroaórtico, is the congenital anomaly of the artery coronary more comum18,19. This anomaly has no clinical significance important, but logically should be considered before heart surgery. It was also observed a patient with coronary only left, where the origin of the artery coronary right arises from the artery circunflexa, with path retroaórtico, and this patient has given input in the service after the dramatic picture of cardiorespiratory arrest at home, ressussitada by a team of customer service mobile emergency. Despite being the cause of myocardial ischemia, the tests that induce ischemia can be normal. The anomalous origin of the left coronary artery of the coronary sinus on the right (in the series presented found in a patient who presented with passage between the aorta and pulmonary trunk) can relate to sudden death in 59% of cases, preceded by physical activity in 81% of the eventos10. This anomaly may present four routes: previously to the pulmonary artery; later to the aorta; intrasseptal between the aorta and the pulmonary artery; and interarterial in between the aorta and the pulmonar20. All subtypes of this anomaly have been associated with sudden death, but the variation interarterial, which is the most common pattern, has a stronger relationship with sequels catastróficas20-22. Was diagnosed also with a patient source of CD in the coronary sinus to the left with passage between the aorta and pulmonary trunk, without extrinsic compression, the patient who performed the examination on the grounds of precordialgia, being observed path anomalous trunk coronary left between the aorta and the pulmonary artery. This patient evolved with sudden death, during hospitalization, while programava surgery for correction of the anomaly of the coronary. It was also observed a patient with a single artery: the trunk of the coronary artery the left, where the coronary sinus to the left gave rise to THE Cx and, this being an anomaly rare, with an incidence of 0.04%, and may be associated with heart defects congenital (tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of great vessels, truncus arteriosus) in 40% of cases. The prognosis of this type of anomaly varies from excellent with no decrease in the survival rate), reserved as their distribution anatomical, including risk of sudden death, once that 15% of people develop heart disease is severe before the age of 40. When developing coronary artery disease, the consequences are significant and the prognosis is serious if the obstruction is proximal, since the ostium is single and there is minimal possibility of collateral circulation. The indication for revascularization should be considered in the presence of symptoms, even in the absence of coronary atherosclerosis, due to the considerable chance of acute myocardial infarction and sudden death. According to the current evidence, the segments of coronary the trip to anomalous are not more susceptible to disease obstructive atherosclerotic of the segments to normal in the same indivíduo10,15. We should always bear in mind the possibility of the anomalous origin of the coronary arteries in patients with precordialgia, lipotímia, syncope, or other symptoms are nonspecific, especially in the case of young people and athletes, and, if available, to launch hand of the angiotomografia coronary multislice for the correct diagnosis and treatment of this entity that, if not treated, may evolve adversely. Conclusion THE OAAC is an entity that is relatively rare, potentially lethal if not diagnosed and treated early, may take several clinical forms and develop an adverse effect. The ATCM represents method for the baccalaureate minimally invasive that allows detecting the origin, course and termination of the anomalies of origin of coronary arteries, enabling the correct diagnosis and assisting in treatment planning. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 