OBJECTIVE: To present the findings of computed Tomography (HRCT) of the chest of pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis. METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the CT scans of ten adult patients, seven women and three men with a mean age of 38.7 years. The tests were reviewed by two radiologists independently, and the final decisions were taken by consensus. Results: The most frequent findings were ground glass opacities and subpleural calcifications, both present in 90% of patients. Other relevant findings were small parenchymal nodules, calcification along the interlobular septa, nodular fissures, subpleural nodules, subpleural cysts, dense consolidations and pattern of mosaic flooring. CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis presents aspects HRCT that are highly suggestive of disease, in most cases dispensing performing lung biopsies. Key words: Tomography, X-rays; Lithiasis / lung; Lung Diseases.     Introduction Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis (PAM) is a rare disease, a chronic disease, with familiar character, which affects young adults and generates special interest in radiological studies owing to its presentation for image, considered pathognomonic and, in the opinion many authors, dispensing, in most cases, lung biopsy.(1-5) More than half of patients are asymptomatic at diagnosis.(5) The disease remains silent for a long period, with later onset of dyspnea, chest pain and dry cough, which may result in cyanosis, respiratory failure and cor pulmonale.(2,4,5) The scarcity of clinical symptoms contrasts with the extensive changes in chest X-rays.(1.4) The detection of the disease in most patients, is done in routine checkups or during family investigation of an individual with alveolar microlithiasis.(5) Computed Tomography (HRCT) has helped to characterize even better presentation imaging of the disease and may be of great help in the diagnosis of MAP.(1-4,6,7) The objective of this study is to describe the changes identified in the CT scans of 10 patients with MAP.   Methods In this study, we retrospectively analyzed the chest tomography scans of 10 patients with PAM, from seven different institutions located in four Brazilian states (Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Goiás and Paraná). Of these patients, seven were female and three male. Ages ranged from 22 to 59 years, mean 38.7 years. The diagnosis was based on patterns observed in X-rays and CT scans, considered pathognomonic of the disease.(1,3-5) However, six patients were also submitted to lung biopsy in the open, which allowed histopathological confirmation. The CT scans of the chest were performed in different scanners, axial slices ranging from 1 to 2 mm thick, 10 mm increments, during a deep inspiration, from the apex to the lung bases. The tests were performed using a parenchymal window, with width between 1000 and 1500 Hounsfield units (HU) and a center between -650 and -750 HU. Tests were also in a mediastinal window, with a width of 350-400 HU and a center between 40 and 60 HU. The analysis of HRCT was done by two observers independently and discordant cases were resolved by consensus. The study included the evaluation of the lung parenchyma, as the presence of small parenchymal nodules, ground-glass opacities, standard-paving, calcification along the interlobular septa, subpleural linear calcifications, subpleural nodules, nodular fissures, dense consolidations, subpleural cysts apical and bubbles. The criteria for defining these findings are those listed in the Glossary of Terms Fleischner Society.(8) The terminology used is that recommended by the consensus of Brazilian College of Radiology Terminology (9) and the Brazilian Society of Thoracic.(10) Small parenchymal nodules were characterized as focal rounded opacities with a diameter less than 10 mm. Ground-glass opacity was defined as the increase in pulmonary attenuation; however, without obscuring the bronchial and vascular margins. Consolidations were considered in the presence of the homogeneous increase in pulmonary parenchymal attenuation coefficient, leading to loss of individualization of vascular structures and the airway wall. dense were called when presented density higher than that of soft tissue when evaluated in mediastinal windows. A mosaic pattern was considered when ground glass opacity areas were observed with thickened interlobular septa in between. Calcification along the interlobular septa was characterized as thin linear opacities, drawing the periphery of secondary pulmonary lobes were displayed in the windows to the mediastinum. subpleural linear calcifications were well described in patients with linear opacities calcified, juxtapleural, continuous and which were also visible in the mediastinal window. subpleural cysts were defined as round structures, hypodense, of less than 10 mm diameter, aligned with the pleura. Nodules Subpleural as nodular opacities along the pleural surface. Nodular fissures when nodules distributed along the fissure lines. Apical bullae were described when airspaces, well defined, thin-walled, larger than 10 mm were observed in lung apexes.   Results The study of CT scans of 10 patients diagnosed with chest MAP showed how frequently changes the ground-glass opacities and subpleural linear calcifications observed in nine patients each (90%). Small parenchymal nodules (Figure 1) were found in seven patients (70%).     Calcification along the interlobular septa were observed in five patients (50%). Of these, four also presented associated attenuation in frosted glass, setting the standard paving pattern (Figure 2). dense consolidations (Figure 3), subpleural nodules, nodular fissure and subpleural cysts (Figure 4) were observed in five cases each (50%). Apical bullae were identified in only one patient (10%).         Tomographic alterations were predominant in the inferior and posterior portions of the lungs, found in nine patients (90%). The apical dominance occurred in only one of the cases studied. These findings are shown in Table 1.     Discussion The MAP is a rare disease, a chronic disease, with etiology and pathogenesis is poorly defined, which is characterized primarily by the presence of numerous small calculi (called calciferites, calcospherites or microliter) within the airspaces.(1-3.5) In literature, studies with larger samples, there is no sex predilection.(5) In this study, the ten patients analyzed, seven were female. The age range is very variable, affecting from newborns to patients in the ninth decade with a mean age at diagnosis of 35 years.(4,5,11) In the present study, ages ranged twenty-two to fifty-nine, with an average of 38.7 years. The disease has a high incidence of familial occurrence (about 1/3 of cases), suggesting the existence of an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.(1-3.5) In this study, two cases occurred in monozygotic twins. However, the families of the other patients were not properly investigated in order to exclude other familial cases. The HRCT findings of patients with alveolar microlithiasis are very varied, with the most publications refer to reports of isolated cases. The ground-glass opacities are a frequent finding in the literature.(1,3,4,6,7,11,12) This was the major finding in this study, being present in 90% of cases. The ground-glass attenuation is due probably to the presence of small calculi in the airspace. subpleural linear calcifications were also found in 90% of patients analyzed in this study. This finding, though commonly seen in CT scans of patients with MAP, is controversial in the literature. Although some authors describe as pleural calcifications (13.14) was no research confirming the histopathology of pleural calcification. Thus, it seems that the best explanation is the accumulation of intra-alveolar calculi in the periphery of secondary pulmonary lobes, demarcating the pleural surface and producing the appearance of pseudo-pleural calcifications.(4,11,15-17) The calcification aspect along the interlobular septa was also a common point of this work with the literature data. This was observed in five patients, corresponding to 50% of the sample. The calcium aspect of septa also occurs due to accumulation of calculation on the periphery of secondary pulmonary lobes since no histologic evidence of calcification in interlobular septa or interstitial involvement in the early stages of the disease.(4,7,11) The A mosaic pattern occurred in four patients, which represents 40% of the sample. In this study, this aspect can also be observed in the mediastinal window images, since there calcification along the interlobular septa. There are no reports in the literature of any other disease with tomographic similar event, and this finding as very specific, and even pathognomonic of MAP HRCT.(7) Small nodules were identified in 70% of patients. The small nodules on HRCT match on chest radiographs to dense Micronodules ( < 1 mm) very thin, well - defined and diffusely throughout the parenchyma, making homogeneously hypotransparent lungs, which characterizes the pattern described by some authors as an aspect of 'storm sand ', considered typical of the disease. When this pattern is identified on radiographs of the chest, only exceptionally lung biopsy is necessary.(1-4) In HRCT often can not set the calcium density of the nodules. This is probably for its small dimensions. When confluent, calcium be better characterized. The confluence of small nodules can form areas of parenchymal consolidation. The presence of calcium, consolidations can have density greater than the soft parts. These consolidations predominantly occur along the heart borders in the lower posterior regions of the lungs, and tend to be symmetrical.(1,2,4,6,7,11,12) Consolidations dense with aerial bronchograms were found in 50% of patients studied, especially in the lower posterior regions. The little literature mentions this finding.(6) Thus, the MAP should be considered a differential diagnosis for dense consolidations, along with amiodarone pulmonary toxicity, pulmonary metastatic calcification, silicoproteinosis, talcosis and amyloidosis.(18) Another finding often mentioned in studies that used HRCT imaging the subpleural cysts. The presence of these small thin-walled cysts, located in subpleural spaces, can determine the formation of a peripheral radiolucent band between the calcified parenchymal and ribs, which is described in the chest X-rays as the sign of 'black pleura'.(1,3,4,7,11) In this study, we observed the presence of subpleural cysts in 50% of cases. One patient had also apical bubbles. In conclusion, the chest HRCT helps in the diagnosis of MAP since it may show typical patterns of disease. The most common tomographic findings were areas of diffuse attenuation in frosted glass and subpleural linear calcifications, present in 90% of patients. Other changes found on HRCT in decreasing order of frequency, were small parenchymal nodules, nodular fissures, the subpleural nodules, calcifications along the interlobular septa, dense consolidations, and subpleural cysts. The calcification found along the interlobular septa, associated with ground-glass attenuation, setting standard paving pattern observed in the mediastinal window, can be considered pathognomonic of MAP, since this aspect, present in 40% of cases our sample has not yet been described in any other disease.   