 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Present the findings in high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest of the microlitíase the alveolar lung. METHODS: we studied, retrospectively, the ct scans of ten patients (adults, seven women and three men, with a mean age of 38.7 years. The scans were analyzed by two radiologists independently, and the final decisions were obtained by consensus. Results: The findings the most frequent were the-glass opacities and calcifications subpleurais, both present in 90% of patients studied. The other findings of greater relevance were small nodules parenquimatosos, calcification along the septa interlobulares, cissuras nodular, nodules subpleurais, cysts subpleurais, consolidations, and dense pattern of pavement in mosaic. CONCLUSIONS: THE microlitíase alveolar lung features on HRCT that are highly suggestive of the disease, in most cases dispensing with the need for carrying out biopsies of the lungs. Descriptors: Computed Tomography X-Ray; Cholelithiasis/lung; pulmonary disease. Introduction The microlitíase alveolar pulmonary (MAP) is a rare disease of chronic evolution, with family character, which affects older individuals, young adults, and that generates special interest in radiological studies due to their pattern of presentation for image, considered patognomônico and, in the opinion of many authors, thus eliminating the need, in most cases, the lung biopsy. (1-5) More than half of patients are asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis. (5) The disease remains silent for a long period, with later emergence of dyspnea, chest pain and dry cough, and may progress to cyanosis, respiratory failure, and cor pulmonale. (2,4,5) The scarcity of clinical symptoms in contrast to the extensive changes in the radiological examination of the chest. (1,4) The detection of the disease, in most patients, is done in routine checkups, or during the investigation the family of an individual carrier microlitíase alveolar. (5) The high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) has helped to characterize better the presentation for the image of the disease, and may be of great aid in the diagnosis of MAP. (1-4,6,7) The objective of this work is to describe the changes identified in the ct scans of 10 patients with MAP. Methods in This study, were analyzed, retrospectively, the ct scans of the thorax of 10 patients with MAP, from seven different institutions located in four states (Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Goiás and Paraná). Of these patients, seven were female and three male. The age range varied between 22 and 59 years, with a mean of 38.7 years. The diagnosis was based on the patterns observed in x-rays and ct scans, considered patognomônicos of the disease. (1,3-5) However, six patients underwent, also, the biopsy of lung open to the sky, which allowed the confirmation of histopathological. The ct scans of the thorax were performed on different ct scanner, with axial sections ranging from 1 to 2 mm of thickness, 10-mm increment, done in deep inspiration, from the apex to the lung bases. The examinations were recorded in a window of parenchyma, with a width between 1000 and 1500 Hounsfield Units (UH) and the center between -650 and -750 HU. Were recorded, also, in the window to the mediastinum, with a width of between 350-400 UH and centre between 40 and 60 UH. The analysis of HRCT was done by two observers independently, and the cases that were discordant were resolved by consensus. The study included evaluation of the pulmonary parenchyma, as to the presence of small nodules parenquimatosos, glass opacities, pattern, paving mosaic, calcification along the septa interlobulares, calcifications linear subpleurais, nodules subpleurais, cissuras nodular, consolidations, dense, cysts subpleurais and bubbles apical. The criteria for definition of these findings are those indicated in the Glossary of Terms of the Society Fleischner. (8) The terminology used is recommended by the Consensus Terminology of the Brazilian College of Radiology(9) and of the Brazilian Society of Pneumology and Tisiology. (10) Small nodules parenquimatosos were characterized as opacities focal rounded, with a diameter of less than 10 mm. Opacity of frosted glass was defined as increased attenuation of the lungs; but without obscuring the margins of the bronchial or vascular. Consolidations were considered to be in the presence of increased homogeneous attenuation coefficient of the lung parenchyma, leading to the loss of the individualization of the vascular structures and the wall of the airways. Have been called dense, when it had a density greater than that of the soft parts, when evaluated in the windows mediastinais. The standard of pavement in mosaic was considered when the areas of opacity in the frosted glass were observed, with septa interlobulares thickened in between. Calcification along the septa interlobulares was characterized when opacities are linear with thin, drawing the periphery of the lobules, the pulmonary side, were displayed in the windows to the mediastinum. Calcifications linear subpleurais have been well described in patients who presented with opacities linear calcified, justapleurais, continuous, and that were also visible in the window of the mediastinum. Cysts subpleurais were defined as structures rounded, hipodensas, of a diameter less than 10 mm, aligned along the pleura. Nodules subpleurais, such as opacities nodular along the surface pleural. Cissuras nodular, when these nodules were distributed along the lines cissurais. Bubbles apical were described when air spaces, well-demarcated, thin-walled, larger than 10 mm, were observed in the apex of the lungs. Results The study of ct scans of the thorax of 10 patients with diagnosis of MAP showed how changes more frequent the-glass opacities and calcifications linear subpleurais, observed in nine patients (90%). Small lumps parenquimatosos (Figure 1) were evident in seven patients (70%). Calcifications along the septa interlobulares were found in five patients (50%). Of these, four had also attenuation in frosted glass associated, setting the standard of paving in the mosaic (Figure 2). Consolidations dense (Figure 3), nodules subpleurais, cissura nodular and cysts subpleurais (Figure 4) were observed in five cases each (50%). Bubbles apical were identified in only one patient (10%). The changes tomographic had distribution prevalent in portions of the lower and later of the lungs, occurring in this way in nine patients (90%). The predominance of the apical region occurred in only one of the cases studied. These findings are represented in Table 1. Discussion THE MAP is a rare disease of chronic evolution, with the etiology and pathogenesis are still poorly defined, which is characterized basically by the presence of innumerable small calculations (called calciferitos, calcosferitos or microlitos) within the air spaces. (1-3,5) In the literature, in the reports with the greatest case-by-case, there is no predilection for sex. (5) in This study, of the ten patients analyzed, seven were female. The age range is very variable, affecting from newborns to patients in the ninth decade, with a mean age at diagnosis of 35 years. (4,5,11) In the present study, the ages ranged from twenty-two to fifty-nine years, with a mean of 38.7 years. The disease has a high incidence of familial occurrence (in around 1/3 of cases), suggesting the existence of a hereditary factor autosomal recessive. (1-3,5) in This case series, two cases occurred in monozygotic twins. However, the families of the other patients were not adequately investigated, in order to exclude other familial cases. The findings on HRCT of patients with microlitíase alveolar are very varied, being that the majority of the publications refer to the reports of isolated cases. The-glass opacities are a find frequent reports in the literature. (1,3,4,6,7,11,12) This was found most expressive of this series, being present in 90% of cases. The attenuation in frosted glass should be, probably, to the presence of small calculations occupying the airspace. Calcifications linear subpleurais were also found in 90% of the patients analyzed in this study. This finding, although commonly seen in the tomographies of patients with MAP, is controversial in the literature. Although some authors describe as calcifications pleural,(13,14), was not found any research confirming histopatologicamente the presence of calcifications pleural. In this way, it seems that the best explanation is the accumulation of calculations in intra-alveolar in the periphery of the lobules, the pulmonary side, demarcating the surface of the pleural and producing the appearance of pseudo-calcifications pleural. (4,11,15-17) The appearance of calcification along the septa interlobulares was also a common point of this work with the literature data. This aspect was observed in five patients, which corresponds to 50% of the sample. The appearance lime of the septa also occurs due to the accumulation of the calculations on the periphery of the lobe pulmonary secondary, since there is no histologic evidence of calcifications in the septa interlobulares, and not compromise the interstitial in the early stages of the disease. (4,7,11) The standard of pavement in mosaic happened in four patients, which represents 40% of our sample. In this study, this aspect can also be observed in the images with the window to the mediastinum, since there is calcification along the septa interlobulares. There is no report in the literature of no other disease with onset tomographic similar: this finding is considered very specific, and even patognomônico of the MAP in the HRCT. (7) Small nodules were identified in 70% of patients. The small nodules on HRCT correspond in the x-rays of the chest to the micronodules, dense (<1 mm) thin, well-defined and diffusely scattered throughout the parenchyma, making the lungs homogeneously hipotransparentes, what characterizes the pattern described by some authors as an aspect of 'sand storm', considered to be typical of the disease. When this pattern is identified on radiographs of the chest, just occasionally, lung biopsy is needed. (1-4) In the HRCT, it is often not possible to set the density cálcica of the nodules. This probably happens due to its small size. When combined, the presence of calcium is best characterized. The confluence of the little nodules that can form areas of consolidation, parenchymal. By the presence of calcium, the consolidations may have a higher density than that of the soft parts. These consolidations occur predominantly along the edges of the heart and in the regions póstero-inferior of the lungs, and tend to be symmetrical. (1,2,4,6,7,11,12) Commits dense with broncogramas air in between have been found in 50% of the patients studied, predominantly in the regions póstero-inferior. Literature little mention this finding. (6) in This way, the MAP should be considered a differential diagnosis for the consolidations dense, along with the pulmonary toxicity by amiodarone, calcification of pulmonary metastatic, silicoproteinose, talcosis, and amyloidosis. (18) Another nding that is quite referred in jobs that used HRCT as an examination of the image, were the cysts subpleurais. The presence of these small cysts thin-walled, located in the spaces subpleurais, can determine the formation of a track radiolucent peripheral, between the parenchyma calcified and the ribs, which is described in the x-rays of the chest as the sign of the 'pleura dark'. (1,3,4,7,11) in This study, we observed the presence of cysts subpleurais in 50% of cases. A patient presented, also, bubbles apical. In conclusion, HRCT of the chest aids in the diagnosis of MAP, since it can demonstrate characteristic patterns of the disease. The ct scan findings but more frequent were the areas of mitigation frosted glass diffuse, and the calcifications linear subpleurais, present in 90% of patients studied. Other changes found on HRCT, in descending order of frequency, were the small lumps parenquimatosos, the cissuras nodular, the nodules subpleurais, the calcifications along the septa interlobulares, the consolidations dense, and the cysts subpleurais. The finding of a calcification along the septa interlobulares, associated with the attenuation in frosted glass, setting the standard of pavement in mosaic, which is observed in the window for the mediastinum, can be considered patognomônico of the MAP, once this aspect, present in 40% of cases of our sample, has not yet been described in any other disease. 