 SUMMARY THE carcinoma bronquíolo-alveolar and adenocarcinomas mixed with component bronquíolo-alveolar have presentations varied and multiple patterns per image. The goal of this essay has been to describe and illustrate the findings most characteristic of these tumors in CT. Are described in three presentations: nodule pulmonary solitary, consolidation and presentation diffuse, being that the last two are important in the differential diagnosis with lesions infectious. The knowledge of the different presentations and the use of workup diagnostic appropriate are definitive for early diagnosis and increased survival. Descriptors: Neoplasms lung; Adenocarcinoma bronquíolo-alveolar; computed Tomography X-ray Introduction adenocarcinomas are the histological most common cancer in many countries, presenting a wide spectrum of particularities of clinical, molecular and pathological, as well as image. Carcinoma bronquíolo-alveolar (CBA) is a subtype of adenocarcinoma with dissemination alveolar (lepídica) in substrate interstitial intact and without vascular invasion, stromal pleural fluid. These tumors can be divided into three types: non cystadenocarcinoma (subtype of cells with clear/pneumócitos type II); cystadenocarcinoma; and mixed (cystadenocarcinoma and not cystadenocarcinoma). Usually, the CBA does not cystadenocarcinoma tends to present itself as a solitary lesion and have a better prognosis, while the subtype cystadenocarcinoma often presents with consolidations, with a propensity for dissemination and a worse survival. (1,2) Prior to sorting the most recent World Health Organization (WHO) for tumors of the lungs, all the tumors with growth lepídico were considered CBA, and the prevalence of this subtype was 24% of all tumors of the lungs. (3) After the new WHO criteria for the diagnosis of CBA, its prevalence has proved to be less than 5% of malignant neoplasms of lung(4); the majority of cases it is now considered to be adenocarcinomas mixed with component bronquíolo-alveolar (AM-CBA). (1,4) The main features of CBA and AM-CBA are peripheral location, reaction desmoplásica, the production of mucin, a high frequency in non-smokers, more frequently in women, low tendency to spread lymph nodes/extratorácica and propensity to multifocalidade. (2,5,6) The symptoms include cough (35%), sputum mucoide (24%), dyspnoea (15%), weight loss (13%), hemoptysis (11%), and fever (8%). (7) The broncorreia is known to be a characteristic of the tumor; however, this is uncommon and presents in the advanced stages of the disease. (7) The survival rates for CBA located can reach 100% in five years. (8) The prognosis is more favourable to the CBA and AM-CBA located with the largest component in frosted glass (> 50%) in the CT scan when compared to that of the tumors are predominantly solid. (3.5-inch) There is evidence showing the low doubling time cell neoplasms lung in smokers, showing greater aggressiveness of the lesion. This fact, associated with worse cardiopulmonary function of many of these patients, explain the worse prognosis of neoplasms lung in smokers. (2,9) The surgical biopsy is the gold standard for the diagnosis; when the procedure is contraindicated, the diagnosis of histology can be made by biopsy percutaneous or transbrônquica associated with findings consistent on CT. (5) Are recognized three major patterns of CBA in CT: nodule pulmonary solitary or mass; consolidation; and multifocal disease. (2,3,10) according to the new WHO classification, the majority of the cases corresponds to AM-CBA, and the CBA pure appears as opacity focal frosted glass on TC, distortion-free architectural. (4) Advances in the understanding of molecular aspects and correlation of radiological-pathological led to a proposal for a new classification of adenocarcinomas, aiming to standardise the terminology and the diagnostic criteria. (11) Although there is a need for criteria universally accepted for subtypes of adenocarcinoma, the authors of the new proposal of classification to understand that there will be a period of adaptation to the terms suggested and recommend initially the use of the preceding terms accompanied by the current naming. (11) The goal of this essay has been to describe the major patterns ct of CBA and AM-CBA by means of a series of illustrative cases. Image patterns in the CBA and AM-CBA Nodule the lung and opacities focal frosted glass-The nodule pulmonary solitary, usually on the periphery of the lobes superior, is described as the manifestation of ct scan most common of the CBA, and AM-CBA. (12) most of these nodules are semissólidos, with solid components and frosted glass, displaying irregular margins, and indentation pleural. (7) While the excavation is rare in the initial presentation, some nodes may have lucências focal, known as pseudocavidades (Figure 1). (7,13) Can be a excavation after chemotherapy treatment (Figure 2). - Glass opacities admit multiple differential diagnoses, ranging from benign diseases, such as fibrosis and focal lesions of the nature infectious; opacities pre-malignant, such as hyperplasia, adenomatous atypical (HAA); up to malignant lesions, such as CBA and AM-CBA. (14) The current WHO classification for tumors of the lung includes the HAA as pre-malignant lesions, the precursor to the CBA, with the morphological characteristics and the molecular own, whose manifestation tomographic most common is to lump lung with attenuation in frosted glass. (1) Nakata et al. studied characteristics tomographic that could help in the differential diagnosis of CBA, and HAA, describing what the HAA is usually < 1.0 cm and features as opacities purely in frosted glass, while CBA has at least 1.0 cm, and can show solid components. (15) In daily practice, the follow-up of opacities focal frosted glass is crucial. The majority of benign lesions tend to reduce or disappear within three months; pre-malignant lesions and malignancies may remain unchanged, or increase (Figure 3). (16) The positron emission tomography (PET, tomography by emission of protons) is taken as a fundamental tool in the staging, treatment and follow-up of neoplasms of the lungs (Figure 4). However, it should be emphasized that the CBA pure may not demonstrate hiperconcentração of 18F fluordesoxiglicose (FDG),(6) given that these tumors are usually indolent, slow-growing and well-differentiated. Soon, the absence of uptake of FDG does not exclude the possibility of neoplasia, such as CBA, small lesions or neoplasms indolent. Martins et al. (17) studied the diagnostic accuracy of PET in the evaluation of nodules solitary, and among the 32 patients studied, we obtained only one false-negative result, whose final diagnosis was the CBA. Thus, the analysis of the aspect of ct is mandatory for the diagnosis (Figure 5). The consolidation pattern the consolidation corresponds to up to 30% of cases of CBA, being more frequent in the variant mucinosa. (3) This pattern is also described as the variant pneumonic of the CBA. (18) Given the difficulty of distinguishing this pattern from the CBA that of pneumonias, infectious, often there is a delay in diagnosis. Some findings, as a sign of the angiogram, broncogramas air-glass opacities and nodules of the air space (Figure 6), can be observed both in the CBA, as in lobar pneumonia. (3,19) Linfonodomegalia and pleural effusion may also be present in both entities. (16) consolidation parenchymal that does not resolve after treatment should raise the possibility of lung cancer. (2,3,18) the sign of The angiogram can be seen in the CT scan with contrast, consisting of the pulmonary vessels that branch off through the consolidation of low attenuation (Figure 7), usually corresponding to the air spaces filled by mucin. First described as specific for the variant pneumonic of the CBA, this signal can be seen in the numerous entities, such as pneumonia, infectious, pulmonary edema, pneumonia, post-obstructive, lymphoma and metastases. (19) THE PET can be useful for the assessment of consolidations parenchymal suspicious for malignancy (Figure 8), is for the characterization of the injury or for the staging of consolidations neoplastic. However, it should be noted that some cases of CBA or AM-CBA may not capture the glucose checked (false-negative) and that inflammatory and/or infectious may be false-positive in the examination of the PET. (5) Display diffuse involvement diffuse from the CBA can represent the source multifocal, dissemination endobrônquica, metastases hematogênicas or combinations of these patterns. Consolidation, nodules (Figure 9), - glass opacities, broncogramas air and cysts (Figure 10), as well as the distribution in the peripheral and the wolves lower, characterize this pattern. (20) lung Lesions satellite can be seen both in the CBA, as in pneumonia. (18) - glass Opacities and associated thickening in septal ("paving tile") are also described in the presentation fuzzy of the CBA (Figure 11). The differential diagnosis should be done with other benign conditions, such as proteinose alveolar,(18) bleeding and infection. The study by PET can be used to evaluate patients with standard diffuse from the CBA, particularly for staging and follow-up post-treatment (Figure 12). It should be remembered that some cases may not capture the glucose marked, highlighting the importance of a careful analysis of CT for the differential diagnosis and staging. Final considerations THE CBA, and the AM-CBA have a wide variety of standard ct, as a nodule or mass is solitary, - glass opacities, consolidation and presentation diffuse. The knowledge of the main findings of picture of these neoplasms is of paramount importance, especially for the early diagnosis and the differentiation of such tumors from infectious processes of the lungs. Opacities focal and/or consolidations parenchymal resolution slow or no significant changes after treatment should raise the suspicion of malignancy of type CBA or AM-CBA; in such situations, it is recommended to proceed in the diagnostic workup to exclude cancer of the lungs. The PET can be employed in the differential diagnosis or in staging neoplastic; it is noteworthy, however, that the method can present false-negative results and false-positive, and one should always carry out a careful analysis of ct scan findings but. 