SUMMARY fistulae of coronary arteries are rare, and most often diagnosed by echocardiography or by coronary angiography, however, computed tomography angiography (CTA) of coronary gaining ground. This disease has a very low incidence, and the fistulas originated from the more frequent right coronary. coronary fistulas to right heart chambers are more incidents are rare for the left ventricle (LV). Treatment can be surgical or percutaneous. This report describes the case of coronary fistula to left ventricle diagnosed by CT angiography of the coronary arteries of 46-year-old, hypertensive, asymptomatic with positive exercise test for ischemia. Coronary CT angiography ruled out obstructive disease, but revealed coronary fistula connecting with left ventricular cavity. Keywords: cardiovascular disease, arterio-arterial fistula, heart ventricles, diagnosis, computed tomography.     Introduction Coronary fistulas (FC) are direct connections from one or more coronary arteries to heart or large vaso1 cameras. Congenital anomalies are more common than adquiridas2, being found in up to 0.2% of coronary angiographies of rotina3. Most patients is assintomática3, but when symptoms, these may include: fatigue, exertional dyspnea, palpitations and ischemic chest pain. continuous murmurs can be sounded out, being similar to a patente4 ductus arteriosus. As a complementary investigation, electrocardiography may be normal. Usually the diagnosis is made by echocardiography, especially when there is dilatation of the coronary artery involved or coronary flow débito5 high, coronary angiography is the gold standard for the diagnosis, revealing important anatomical details for tratamento2. This report describes a rare case of coronary fistula to LV diagnosed by CT angiography of the coronary arteries.   Case report This is male patient, 46, obese, hypertensive and dyslipidemic. On physical examination, he presented regular heart rate in three stages, PA: 160 x 100 mmHg. Remained asymptomatic ambulatory research for coronary artery disease (CAD). Ischemic evidence obtained through exercise test was positive. So, in order to exclude CAD, held a CT angiography of the coronary arteries, which showed coronary arteries markedly dilated and tortuous, and large fistula connecting the anterior descending artery and the right coronary artery and one mouth for the LV cavity adjacent to the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve (Figure).   examination they reviewed methods and the patient's medical history in the digital archive of images (PACS). Obtained the patient's permission to use the images to a case report. The equipment used was the Philips Medical Systems model Brilliance 16-MDCT. With the patient supine in respiratory pause (15 seconds apnea), with electrocardiographic synchronization (ECG), tomographic images of the heart with 0.75 mm thickness were obtained using 80 mL of nonionic iodinated contrast medium (350 mg Optiray / ml) in an infusion pump at 5 ml / sec, followed by 40 ml of 0.9% saline at the same infusion rate. The images were visualized in Workstation Philips Medical Systems model Brilliance CT. reformations were performed multiplanar (MPR), curved multiplanar (MPRC) and 3D reconstructions with volumerendering technique (VR) (Figures 1 and 2).   Discussion The incidence of coronary fistula between congenital heart defects is low, amounting to only 0.2% to 0.4%. It was first described in 1886 and the first surgical correction was successfully performed in 19471. The congenital origin is even more observed than adquirida2 and associated anomalies may occur, being described in the literature associations with patent ductus arteriosus, tetralogy of Fallot, VSD and even heart disease adquiridas5. The acquired may be infectious, traumatic or iatrogênicas2. There are reports also of coronary fistulas associated with permanent pacemaker erosion electrodes, after cardiac surgery, coronary angioplasty or acute myocardial miocárdio4. Fistulas arising from the right coronary artery are the most frequent (70%), but can also occur in the left coronary artery, or in both arteries. Generally, drainage is made to pressão3 lower chambers. Thus, communication with right chambers has a higher incidence between 39 and 41% to the right ventricle, between 26 and 33% to the right atrium, between 15 and 20% to the pulmonary artery, the coronary sinus and the vena cava superior3,5 . Fistulas for VE are very rare, with an incidence of only 3% 6,7. The coronary arteries develop early in embryogenesis, between 6Âª and 8Âª weeks. The first structure of coronary arteries is a myocardial capillary network, which is formed endothelial cells. The coronary arterial system is formed around the truncus arteriosus, and its main structure begins to develop more in the portion that will become the future aorta when its splitting joining the capillary network miocárdica6. Coronary fistulas can develop when there is a persistence of spaces and sinusoids intertrabecular embryonic, however, when the main coronary artery remains attached to the pulmonary trunk, we are faced with an anomalous origin of coronária4,7,8. The pathophysiology and clinical features depend on the magnitude of blood flow through the fistula and its location. Most carriers are asymptomatic (55%) 3, however, when there is clinical manifestation, this is heart failure or dyspnea on exertion. continuous, superficial and deep breath in classical setting of patent ductus arteriosus can be a finding of físico4,8 examination. They also may occur the phenomenon of "coronary flow leakage" and symptomatology, in such cases, would precordialgia, or signs of ischemia with conventional electrocardiogram or effort, as in the case noted. Ischemic manifestation does not depend on the size of the fistula and has been described even with small fluxo5. The differential diagnosis of fistulas of the coronary arteries should be done with patent ductus arteriosus, aortic insufficiency, sinus of Valsalva aneurysm ruptured pulmonary fistula or chest wall. The fistulae can be diagnosed by echocardiography, which may visualize a dilated coronary artery, from which the abnormality arises, and even the fistula, including the entrance to a chamber or vessel, and a turbulent contínuo8 systolic and diastolic flow. However, coronary angiography is the method of choice for diagnosis, although the fistula relationship details with other structures can not be revealed by this técnica2. Still, CT angiography of the coronary arteries may play an important role in the diagnosis and treatment of this pathology, after his ability to describe important details of the coronary anatomy and its relationship to other structures of the heart make it a diagnostic method by promising image for this and other clinical applications. Besides, integrate with CT angiography study of myocardial perfusion SPECT stress is an option that can still reveal more details pathophysiological diagnosis, revealing minimal degrees of isquemia2. Regarding the treatment, although experts recommend the mechanical repair of the fistula (open or percutaneous), this is a recommendation to symptomatic cases, with no guidelines for asymptomatic. However, there are some publications that recommend the correction, even in asymptomatic patients, taking into account the size and diameter of the defect in order to prevent premature coronary disease in the vessel affected8. asymptomatic and minimally symptomatic elderly patients seem to benefit from drug therapy. Recommended procedures include traditional antianginal agents such as beta blockers, aspirin, and calcium channel blockers. vasodilators, such as nitrates, have been reported as intensifiers of coronary steal phenomenon, and relative contraindication these patients6. For the series reported in the literature, it is not possible to establish standard of care. There is no consensus on whether the surgical treatment should always be done because we do not know exactly the natural course of the disease, as well as the frequency of complications that can occur. The spontaneous closure of the fistula is very rare, but descrito5. Some authors argue that endocarditis prophylaxis should be performed in these individuals4. The treatment may be surgical or percutaneous, depending on the flow of ischemia and the risk of complications5. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   