SUMMARY fistulae of coronary arteries are rare, and most often diagnosed by echocardiography or by coronary angiography, however, computed tomography angiography (CTA) of coronaries is gaining ground. This disease has a very low incidence, and the fistulas more frequently originate from the right coronary. Coronary fistulas of the right heart chambers are more frequent, and rare for the left ventricle (LV). Treatment can be surgical or percutaneous. This report describes the case of coronary fistula to left ventricle diagnosed by CT angiography of the coronary arteries of 46-year-old, hypertensive, asymptomatic with positive exercise test for ischemia. Coronary CT angiography ruled out obstructive disease, but revealed coronary fistula connected with left ventricular cavity. Keywords: cardiovascular disease, arterio-arterial fistula, heart ventricles, diagnosis, computed tomography.     Introduction Coronary fistulas (FC) are direct connections from one or more coronary arteries to heart chambers or large blood vessels1. Congenital anomalies are more common than acquired ones 2, being found in up to 0.2% of routine coronary angiographies 3. Most patients are asymptomatic 3, but when symptoms are presented, these may include: fatigue, exertional dyspnea, palpitations and ischemic chest pain. Continuous murmurs can be heard, sounding similar to a patent ductus arteriosus4. As a complementary investigation, electrocardiography may be normal. Usually the diagnosis is made by echocardiography, especially when there is dilatation of the coronary artery involved or coronary flow of high output5, with the coronary angiography being the gold standard for the diagnosis, revealing important anatomical details for treatment2. This report describes a rare case of coronary fistula to LV diagnosed by CT angiography of the coronary arteries.   Case report This is male patient, 46, obese, hypertensive and dyslipidemic. On physical examination, the same presented with regular heart rate in three stages, PA: 160 x 100 mmHg. Found asymptomatic in ambulatory research for coronary artery disease (CAD). Ischemic evidence obtained through exercise test was positive. So, in order to exclude CAD, held a CT angiography of the coronary arteries, which showed coronary arteries markedly dilated and tortuous, and large fistula connecting the anterior descending artery and the right coronary artery and one mouth for the LV cavity adjacent to the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve (Figure).   Methods They reviewed the exam and the patient's medical history in the digital image archive (PACS). Obtained the patient's permission to use the images for a case report. The equipment used was the Philips Medical Systems model Brilliance 16-MDCT. With the patient supine, in respiratory pause (15 seconds apnea), with electrocardiographic synchronization (ECG), tomographic images of the heart with 0.75 mm thickness were obtained using 80 mL of nonionic iodinated contrast medium (350 mg Optiray/ml) in an infusion pump at 5 ml/sec, followed by 40 ml of 0.9% saline at the same infusion rate. The images were visualized in Workstation Philips Medical Systems model Brilliance CT. Multiplanar Reformations (MPR) were performed, as well as curved multiplanar (MPRC) and 3D reconstructions with volumerendering technique (VR) (Figures 1 and 2).   Discussion The incidence of coronary fistula among those with congenital heart defects is low, amounting to only 0.2% to 0.4%. It was first described in 1886 and the first surgical correction was successfully performed in 1947 1. The congenital origin is more observed than acquired2 and associated anomalies may occur, described in literature associations with patent ductus arteriosus, tetralogy of Fallot, VSD and even acquired heart disease5. The acquired may be infectious, traumatic or iatrogenic2. There are reports also of coronary fistulas associated with permanent erosion from pacemaker electrodes, after cardiac surgery, coronary angioplasty or acute myocardial infarction4. Fistulas arising from the right coronary artery are the most frequent (70%), but can also occur in the left coronary artery, or in both arteries. Generally, drainage is done in the lower pressure chambers3. Thus, communication with right chambers has a higher incidence between 39 and 41% to the right ventricle, between 26 and 33% to the right atrium, between 15 and 20% to the pulmonary artery, the coronary sinus and the vena cava superior3,5. Fistulas for VE are very rare, with an incidence of only 3% 6,7. The coronary arteries develop early in embryogenesis, between the 6th and 8th week. The first structure of the coronary arteries is a myocardial capillary network, which is formed by endothelial cells. The coronary arterial system is formed around the truncus arteriosus, and its main structure begins to develop more in the portion that will become the future aorta when its splitting joins the myocardiac capillary network 6. Coronary fistulas can develop when there is a persistence of spaces and intertrabecular embryonic sinusoids, however, when the main coronary artery remains attached to the pulmonary trunk, we are faced with an anomalous origin of the coronary4,7,8. The pathophysiology and clinical features depend on the magnitude of blood flow through the fistula and its location. Most carriers are asymptomatic (55%) 3, however, when there is clinical manifestation, it is of heart failure or dyspnea on exertion. Continuous murmur, superficial and intensely-focused around the ductus arteriosus, can be a finding of a physical examination4,8. The phenomenon of "coronary flow leakage" and symptomatology may also occur, in such cases, it would be angina pectoris, or signs of ischemia with a conventional electrocardiogram or stress test, as in the case noted. Ischemic manifestation does not depend on the size of the fistula and has been described even with small flow5. The differential diagnosis of fistulas of the coronary arteries should be done with patent ductus arteriosus, aortic insufficiency, sinus of Valsalva aneurysm ruptured pulmonary fistula or chest wall. The fistulae can be diagnosed by echocardiography, which helps visualize a dilated coronary artery, from which the abnormality arises, and even the fistula, including the entrance to a chamber or vessel, and a constant turbulent of systolic and diastolic flow. However, coronary angiography is the method of choice for diagnosis, although the fistula relation with other structures can not be revealed by this technique 2. Still, CT angiography of the coronary arteries may play an important role in the diagnosis and treatment of this pathology, given that its ability to describe important details of the coronary anatomy and its relationship to other structures of the heart make it a promising diagnostic method for this and other clinical applications. Besides, integrating angiography with the study of myocardial perfusion to stress SPECT is an option that can reveal still more pathophysiological details of the diagnosis, revealing minimal degrees of ischemia2. Regarding the treatment, although experts recommend the mechanical repair of the fistula (open or percutaneous), this is a recommendation for symptomatic cases, with no guidelines for asymptomatic. However, there are some publications that recommend the correction, even in asymptomatic patients, taking into account the size and diameter of the defect in order to prevent premature coronary disease in the vessel affected8. Asymptomatic and minimally symptomatic elderly patients seem to benefit from drug therapy. Recommended procedures include traditional antianginal agents such as beta blockers, aspirin, and calcium channel blockers. Vasodilators, such as nitrates, have been reported as intensifiers of coronary theft phenomenon, and are relatively contraindicated for these patients6. According to the case studies reported in the literature, it is not possible to establish standardized care. There is no consensus on whether the surgical treatment should always be done because it is not exactly known the natural course of the disease, or the frequency of complications that can occur. The spontaneous closure of the fistula is very rare, but described 5. Some authors argue that endocarditis prophylaxis should be performed in these individuals4. The treatment may be surgical or percutaneous, depending on the flow of ischemia and the risk of complications5. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare there is no relevant conflict of interest. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic Association This study not associated with any graduate programs.   