 SUMMARY Fistulas of the coronary arteries are rare, being diagnosed most often by echocardiography or coronary angiography, however, the angiotomografia scan (angio-CT) of the coronary arteries earn space. This pathology has an incidence very low, being the fistulas originating from the coronary right more frequent. Fistula coronary to right heart chambers are more incidents being rare for the left ventricle (VE). The treatment can be surgical or percutaneous. This report describes the case of a fistula coronary to VE diagnosed by angio-CT of the coronary arteries in a 46 year old man, hypertensive, coronary artery disease with exercise stress test positive for ischemia. Angio-CT of the coronary arteries ruled out disease obstructive, but revealed fistula coronary by connecting with the cavity left ventricular. Key words: cardiovascular Diseases, fistula arterio-arterial, ventricles of the heart, diagnosis, computed tomography. Introduction fistulas coronary artery (FC) are direct connections of one or more coronary arteries to the heart chambers or great vaso1. Congenital anomalies are more common than the adquiridas2, being found in up to 0.2% of the cineangiocoronariografias of rotina3. The majority of patients is assintomática3, but, when you have symptoms, these can be: fatigue, exertional dyspnea, palpitations and chest pain ischemic. Puffs continuous can be surveyed, being similar to that of a ductus arteriosus patente4. As a foundation supplement, the electrocardiography can be normal. Usually, the diagnosis is made by echocardiography, especially when there is dilation of the coronary artery involved, or the coronary blood flow of high débito5, being the coronary angiography, the gold standard for diagnosis, revealing anatomical details important for the tratamento2. This report describes a rare case of fistula coronary to the VE diagnosed by angio-CT of the coronary arteries. Report of the case it is the patient male, 46 years old, obese, hypertensive and dislipidêmico. On physical examination, the same had heart rhythm regular three times, PA: 160 x 100 mmHg. He was asymptomatic in the investigation at the outpatient clinic for coronary artery disease (cad). The proof ischemic obtained by means of the exercise stress test was positive. So, in order to exclude the DAC, we performed an angio-CT of the coronary arteries, which revealed coronary arteries markedly dilated and tortuous, in addition to large fistula connecting the artery previous downward with the coronary right and the mouth only to the cavity of the LV, adjacent to the leaflet posterior mitral valve (Figures). Methods Reviewed-if the examination and the medical history of the patient in the file of digital images (PACS). We obtained the permission from the patient to the use of images to report the case. The equipment used was the Philips Medical Systems model Brilliance 16-MDCT. With the patient supine, paused breathing (apnea of 15 seconds), in synchronization electrocardiographic (ECG), a ct section of the heart with 0.75 mm thickness were obtained, using 80 ml of iodinated contrast nonionic (Optiray 350 mg/ml) in the infusion pump to 5 ml/second, followed by 40 ml of saline 0.9% with the same speed of infusion. The images were visibilizadas on the workstation from Philips Medical Systems model Brilliance CT. Were carried out reformatações multiplanares (MPR), multiplanares curved (MPRc), and reconstructions in 3D with the technique volumerendering (VR) (Figures 1 and 2). Discussion The incidence of fistula coronary between congenital heart defects is low, amounting to just 0.2% to 0.4%. It was first described in 1886 and the first surgical correction was successfully performed in 19471. The congenital origin is further observed that the adquirida2 and associated anomalies can occur, and are described in the literature associations with persistence of the ductus arteriosus, tetralogy of Fallot, ventricular septal defect, and even heart diseases adquiridas5. The acquired may be infectious, traumatic or iatrogênicas2. There are reports also of fistulas coronary heart associated with the electrodes for permanent pacemaker by erosion, after heart surgery, coronary angioplasty or acute myocardial miocárdio4. The fistulas originating from the coronary right are more frequent (70%), and may also occur in the left coronary artery or on both arteries. Usually, the drainage is made for cameras of low pressão3. In this way, the communication with the right chambers has highest incidence, between 39 and 41% for the right ventricle, between 26 and 33% for the right atrium, between 15% and 20% to the pulmonary artery, the coronary sinus and the vena cava superior3,5. Fistulas for VE are very rare, having an incidence of only 3%6,7. The coronary arteries develop early in embryogenesis, between the 6Âª and 8Âª weeks. The first structure of the coronary arteries consists of a capillary network in the myocardial, which is formed of endothelial cells. The arterial system coronary artery is formed around the truncus arteriosus, and its main structure begins to develop more in the portion that will become the future aorta, when your bipartição joining in the capillary network miocárdica6. Fistulas cancer, can develop when there is a persistence of spaces and sinusoides intertrabeculares embryonic, however, when the coronary artery the main remains attached to the trunk of the pulmonary, we are faced with an anomalous origin of coronária4,7,8. The pathophysiology and the clinical picture depend on the magnitude of the flow of blood through the fistula and its location. The majority of carriers are asymptomatic (55%)3 , however, when there is clinical manifestation, this is heart failure or dyspnoea to the efforts. Blow continuous, shallow and intense on-location classical channel blood persistent can be a finding of the examination físico4,8. Can also occur the phenomenon of "leakage of coronary blood flow", and the symptoms, in such cases, it would be precordialgia, or signs of ischemia in the electrocardiogram, conventional or effort, as in the case observed. The manifestation of ischemic does not depend on the size of the fistula and has been described even with small fluxo5. The differential diagnosis of fistulas of the coronary arteries should be done with persistence of the ductus arteriosus, aortic insufficiency, aneurysm of the sinus of Valsalva roto and fistula lung or the chest wall. Fistulas can be diagnosed by echocardiography, which can make visible a dilated coronary artery, from where the anomaly originates, and the fistula, including the entrance to a chamber or vessel, in addition to a flow systolic and diastolic turbulent contínuo8. However, coronary angiography is the method of choice for diagnosis, although details of the relationship of the fistula tract with other structures may not be revealed by this técnica2. Still, the angio-CT of the coronary arteries could play an important role in the diagnosis and therapy of this pathology, after all your ability to describe important details of the coronary anatomy and its relationship with other structures of the heart make it a method of diagnostic imaging is promising for this and other clinical applications. In addition to that, integrate the angiotomografia with the study of myocardial perfusion stress SPECT is an option that can reveal even more details pathophysiological diagnosis, revealing minimum isquemia2. With respect to the treatment, though experts recommend the mechanics repair the fistula (open procedure or percutaneous), this is a recommendation in symptomatic cases, in the absence of guidelines for asymptomatic. There are, however, some of the publications that recommend a fix, even in asymptomatic patients, taking into consideration the size and the diameter of the defect, with the aim of preventing coronary heart disease to premature vessel afetado8. Elderly patients asymptomatic and minimally symptomatic patients appear to benefit from drug therapy. Regimens recommended include agents antianginosos traditional, such as beta-blockers, aspirin, and calcium channel blockers. Agents, vasodilators, such as nitrates, have been reported as exacerbadores of the phenomenon of theft, coronary artery, having contraindication concerning these pacientes6. By the case series reported in the literature do not allow to establish conduct standard. There is no consensus if the surgical treatment should always be performed, since it is not known with accuracy the natural evolution of the disease, as well as the frequency of the complications that may occur. The spontaneous closure of the fistula is very rare, however descrito5. Some authors advocate prophylaxis for endocarditis should be performed in these indivíduos4. The treatment can be either surgical or percutaneous, depending on the flow, ischemia and the risk of complicações5. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 