SUMMARY The authors report the case of a patient with urethral stenosis who developed chronic eosinophilic pneumonia secondary to prolonged use of nitrofurantoin for prophylaxis of recurrent urinary tract infection. The patient had undergone a lung biopsy in the open. Emphasis is given to the findings of computed tomography scan of the chest, as though the pulmonary changes associated with toxicity of nitrofurantoin are generally basal and bilateral, in the case described here, the interstitial-alveolar nature of injuries were seen in subpleural regions of the upper lobes. These findings alone, are very suggestive of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia. The diagnosis was confirmed by biopsy review. Keywords: Pneumonia; pulmonary eosinophilia; Nitrofurantoin / adverse effects; Computed tomography by X-ray     Introduction Nitrofurantoin has been widely used as an effective and relatively safe medications for the treatment of genitourinary infections, are rare complications resulting from its use. However, pulmonary parenchymal changes have occasionally been associated with long-term therapy. The authors report the case of a patient with chronic eosinophilic pneumonia secondary to long-term use of this drug, with emphasis on the findings of computed Tomography (HRCT) of the chest.   Case report female, 74, sought our service in September 2003, complaining of chronic cough for years and elimination of scarce secretion. Reported a chest radiograph twenty months before, which had shown 'pulmonary fibrosis'. Examination of lung function revealed a slight restriction pattern (total lung capacity 79%) and reduced carbon monoxide diffusion (63% predicted). Initial treatment with oral and inhaled corticosteroids previously performed at another hospital was not successful and was then performed a lung biopsy in the open, a histopathological diagnosis of diffuse interstitial fibrosis stage. In the past medical history, stood out the story of uterine cancer at age 35, which was treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The patient had urethral stenosis as a complication of the picture, with recurrent episodes of urinary tract infection, whose management included autocatheterism 4/4 h and prophylaxis with nitrofurantoin in the last three years. Physical examination showed only scar left thoracotomy, decreased chest expansion and crackles in the lung bases. The review of lung biopsy by a pathologist resulted in the histologic diagnosis of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, possibly attenuated by prior steroid use, associated with changes resulting from bronchial obstruction. There was infiltration of eosinophils and mononuclear cells along the alveolar septa and alveolar spaces (Figure 1). Considering that the pathological findings could be associated with a reaction to nitrofurantoin, this medication was discontinued, and was initiated oral corticosteroid therapy. The chest radiograph performed four months after the initial consultation showed areas of subpleural interstitial thickening in the upper lobes. HRCT held concurrently revealed subpleural focal areas of thickening of the interlobular and the interstice associated with discrete opacities 'frosted glass', and these changes were only present in the upper lobes and it was noticed alveolar opacity in the anterior segment of the left upper lobe (Figure 2). There was no mediastinal changes. HRCT control held four months later showed no significant changes except for improved alveolar opacity area in the upper left lobe (Figure 3). Dyspnea and rales progressive resolution during treatment, and the dose of oral corticosteroids gradually reduced until the complete withdrawal of the medication, after fifteen months of treatment. There was no return of symptoms after discontinuation of corticosteroid therapy.   Discussion Nitrofurantoin pulmonary toxicity was first reported in 1957 by Fisk.(1) Since then, there have been several reports of pulmonary reactions induced by this drug, with polymorphic including pulmonary fibrosis (2,3) alveolar hemorrhage, (4) bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia, bronchiolitis obliterans organizing known as pneumonia. (BOOP) in English (5) lupus-like syndrome, (6) desquamative interstitial pneumonia, unusual and non-specific (7) allergic reaction (8) diffuse alveolar damage, (9) as well as eosinophilic pneumonia.(10) The lung disease induced by nitrofurantoin has basically two forms: acute, more common, which develops hours to days after the use of medication, probably related to a hypersensitivity reaction or an immune reaction, and chronic form, which comes after months or years of continuous use, probably related to direct tissue damage by oxidants.(11-13) The acute form is characterized clinically by tachypnea, fever, nonproductive cough, tachycardia, chest pain, rash and arthralgia. Chest radiography shows reticular pattern or bibasal alveolar pattern, with septal lines and pleural effusion, pulmonary edema simulating. peripheral eosinophilia and reduced carbon monoxide diffusion are usually present, and there may be hypoxemia and restrictive pattern in pulmonary function tests.(13-15) The differential diagnosis should be made mainly with pulmonary embolism, infection, myocardial infarction and heart failure, critical temporal relationship between the onset of symptoms and the start of the medication and the fact that there is significant improvement withdrawal thereof. The chronic form is more insidious onset, progressive dyspnea, dry cough and tachypnea without fever. Chest X-ray reveals more often interstitial thickening in the bases.(3,16) Pulmonary function tests reveal restrictive pattern, with hypoxemia and low diffusion of carbon monoxide. The differential diagnosis includes idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and other causes of basal interstitial thickening. The improvement of symptoms usually occurs a few months after the drug is discontinued, may or may not be regression of interstitial thickening. Histopathological diagnosis of our patient was chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, with no specific reports of this disease as an adverse reaction to nitrofurantoin through study by HRCT in the literature. The principal chronic alterations associated with nitrofurantoin are usually basal, (3,16,17) being described sparse and peribronchovascular changes when the reaction was the development of BOOP.(5) There may be overlap of clinical, radiological and pathological findings of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia and BOOP, but in many cases HRCT helps to differentiate between these two diseases. In the case in question, the findings were predominantly in the upper lobes, mainly subpleural, highly suggestive of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia considering only HRCT.(18-20) The favorable clinical outcome after medication suspension and absence of recurrence after cessation of corticosteroid therapy possible to establish a causal relationship between lung disease and the use of nitrofurantoin, and the persistence of imaging findings in the upper lobes translates irreversible chronic interstitial changes. Knowledge of the various pulmonary manifestations resulting from the use of nitrofurantoin, both acute and chronic, as well as the knowledge that the patient made use of this medication are essential for the diagnosis of pulmonary drug reaction. Some authors recommend the semi-annual performance of chest X-rays for the early diagnosis of lung disorders in patients on prolonged use of nitrofurantoin.   