 SUMMARY The authors report the case of a patient with stenosis of the urethra that developed pneumonia, eosinophilic, chronic-secondary to the prolonged use of nitrofurantoin as prophylaxis for urinary tract infection repeat. The patient had undergone a lung biopsy in the open. Emphasis is given to the findings of high resolution computed tomography of the chest, since although the pulmonary changes associated with the toxicity of nitrofurantoin are generally basal and bilateral, in the case described here, the lesions of nature interstitial-alveolar stood in the regions subpleurais of the wolves higher. These findings, by themselves, are very suggestive of pneumonia, eosinophilic, chronic. The diagnosis was confirmed through review of the biopsy. Keywords: Pneumonia; pulmonary Eosinophilia; Nitrofurantoin/adverse effects; Tomography X-ray Introduction The nitrofurantoin has been widely used as a medication effective and relatively safe in the treatment of infections genito-urinary tract, being rare the complications arising from its use. However, changes in parenchymal lung have occasionally been associated with therapy of long duration. The authors report the case of a patient with pneumonia, eosinophilic, chronic-secondary to the prolonged use of this drug, with emphasis on the findings of high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest. Report of the case female Patient, 74 years old, came to our service, in September 2003, with the complaint of chronic cough for years and elimination of secretions is scarce. However, the realization of radiography of the thorax, twenty months before, which would have shown 'pulmonary fibrosis'. The examination of lung function revealed a pattern of discrete restriction (total lung capacity of 79%) and reduction in diffusion of carbon monoxide (63% predicted). The initial treatment with steroid therapy and oral inhalation previously held in another service was not as successful, having been then performed a lung biopsy open to the sky, whose histopathological diagnosis was interstitial fibrosis diffuse in phase sub-acute. In the history of pathological back, was that if the report of cancer of the uterus at the age of 35, which was treated with radiation therapy and chemotherapy. The patient presented stenosis of the urethra as a complication of the framework, with recurrent episodes of urinary infection, whose management included autocateterismo of 4/4 h and prophylaxis with nitrofurantoin over the last three years. The physical examination showed only the scar of a left thoracotomy, chest expansion decreased and throes roaring in the lung bases. The review of the lung biopsy by a pathologist resulted in the diagnosis histological of pneumonia, eosinophilic, chronic, possibly attenuated by prior use of steroids, is associated with changes arising from obstruction bronquiolar. There was infiltrate of eosinophils and mononuclear cells along the septa alveolar spaces and alveolar (Figure 1). Considering that the findings of pathological could be associated with a reaction to nitrofurantoin, this medication was suspended, and was started oral corticoid therapy. The chest radiography performed four months after initial consultation showed areas of thickening interstitial subpleural on the lobes the upper. HRCT, performed concurrently, revealed focal areas subpleurais of thickening of the interstitium intralobular and interlobular associated with discrete opacities in the 'frosted glass', and that these changes were present only on the lobes higher and you noticed opacity alveolar in the anterior segment of the upper lobe to the left (Figure 2). There were no changes mediastinais. The HRCT scan control performed four months later showed no significant changes, except for improvement in the area of opacity alveolar in the upper lobe to the left (Figure 3). The dyspnea and the throes lung presented a resolution phase during treatment, with the dose of corticosteroid oral progressively reduced until the complete cessation of the medication, after fifteen months of treatment. There was no return of symptoms after discontinuation of steroid therapy. Discussion pulmonary toxicity of nitrofurantoin was first reported in 1957 by Fisk. (1) Since then, there have been several reports of reactions induced pulmonary this drug, with frames polymorphous that include pulmonary fibrosis,(2,3) hemorrhage alveolar,(4) bronchiolitis obliterans with pneumonia, organizational, known as bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia. (BOOP) in English,(5) syndrome similar to lupus,(6) pneumonia interstitial descamativa, usual and non-specific,(7) allergic reaction,(8) damage to the alveolar diffuse,(9) in addition to pneumonia, eosinophilic. (10) lung disease induced by the nitrofurantoin has basically two forms of presentation: an acute form, the most common, which develops hours to days after the use of the medication, probably related to a hypersensitivity reaction or an immune reaction, and a chronic form, which comes after months or years of continuous use, most likely related to tissue injury directly by oxidants. (11-13) The acute form is characterized clinically by tachypnea, fever, non-productive cough, tachycardia, chest pain, rash, and arthralgia. The chest radiograph shows a pattern reticular pattern or alveolar bibasal, with lines, septal and pleural effusion, mimicking pulmonary edema. Peripheric eosinophilia and reduction of the diffusion of carbon monoxide are often present, and there may be hypoxemia and restrictive pattern on pulmonary function tests. (13-15) The differential diagnosis should be done mainly with pulmonary embolism, infection, myocardial infarction and heart failure, which is the fundamental temporal relationship between the onset of symptoms and the start of the medication and the fact that there is significant improvement with the removal of this. The chronic form begins more insidiously, with dyspnea, progressive cough, and tachypnea without fever. The chest radiograph reveals more frequently thickening and interstitial in the bases. (3,16) pulmonary function tests reveal a restrictive pattern, with hypoxemia and low diffusion of carbon monoxide. The differential diagnosis includes idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and other causes of thickening interstitial basal. The improvement of symptoms usually gives a few months after the drug is discontinued, and may or may not be regression of the thickening in the interstitial. The histopathological diagnosis of our patient was pneumonia, eosinophilic, chronic, with no reports specifically about this illness as an adverse reaction to nitrofurantoin through study by HRCT in the literature researched. The main changes to the chronic disability associated with nitrofurantoin are usually basal,(3,16,17) being described changes and sparse peribroncovasculares when the reaction has been the development of BOOP. (5) there May be overlap of clinical findings, radiological and pathological of pneumonia, eosinophilic, chronic, and the BOOP, but in many cases the HRCT helps in the differentiation of these two diseases. In the account in question, the findings were predominantly of lobes higher, mainly subpleurais, quite suggestive of pneumonia, eosinophilic chronic considering only the HRCT. (18-20) The clinical evolution is favourable after discontinuation of the medication and the absence of recurrence after discontinuation of steroid therapy have allowed to establish the causal relationship between the pulmonary presentation and the use of the nitrofurantoin, and the persistence of the findings of the image in wolves superior translates changes interstitial chronic, irreversible. The knowledge about the various manifestations of pulmonary arising from the use of nitrofurantoin, both acute and chronic, as well as the knowledge that the patient made use of this medication are essential for the diagnosis of the reaction of the lung to the drug. Some authors recommend carrying out six-monthly chest x-rays for the early diagnosis of pulmonary changes in patients on long-term use of nitrofurantoin. 