SUMMARY Macrophage activation syndrome is a rare and potentially fatal disease. It occurs due to a change in the immune system, with excessive proliferation of macrophages, typically causing hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia and liver dysfunction. In this article, we report an unusual presentation of macrophage activation syndrome and respiratory failure as well as the first node description excavated, frosted glass and consolidation computed tomography scan of the lung (simulating pneumonia or alveolar hemorrhage) and therapeutic success with the use of human immunoglobulin. So we suggest that macrophage activation syndrome be considered in the differential diagnosis of respiratory failure and causes the rapid diagnosis and treatment are essential for good patient outcomes. Keywords: macrophage activation; Lymphohistiocytosis hemophagocytic; computed tomography X-ray; Interstitial lung diseases.     Introduction Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS), also known as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis or hemophagocytic syndrome, is a rare and potentially fatal disease. It occurs due to the immune dysregulation manifested as excessive macrophage proliferation in response to triggering agent, such as infections, rheumatic diseases or tumors. In general, the clinical presentation of SAM includes sudden onset of fever, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, pancytopenia and liver dysfunction. The histological finding constitutes erythrocytes by macrophage phagocytosis (which degrades the erythrocytes, producing hemosiderin) in the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes or lungs without significant pleomorphism and mitotic activity.(1-4) We report the first case in which diffuse ground-glass opacities accompanied by pulmonary consolidations, simulating severe pneumonia were seen in CT high resolution (HRCT) of an adult with SAM.   Case report A 71-year-old man recently diagnosed with Cushing's syndrome due to an adrenal tumor, complained of cough, dyspnea and fever. On physical examination, peripheral oxygen saturation in room air was 88%. Laboratory tests revealed anemia, thrombocytopenia and elevated levels of liver aminotransferase, and cholestasis, hypertriglyceridemia and an extremely high level of serum ferritin (10,580 mg / L; normal range, 20-250 mg / L). A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography and normal ultrasound excluded the biliary system obstruction hypothesis. In order to investigate anemia, aspiration was performed in the bone marrow, the results were consistent with the diagnosis of SAM. The results of the suction culture were negative. A CT scan of the chest revealed a nodule excavated, along with ground-glass opacities and consolidations (Figure 1). It was carried out, then a bronchoscopy. Cultures from bronchoalveolar lavage were negative, and a transbronchial biopsy of the right lower lobe showed abundant macrophages with hemosiderin in the alveolar spaces, as well as the absence of significant pleomorphism or mitotic activity. There were lymphocytic infiltration in the alveolar septa, which had thickened. These histologic findings are also compatible with SAM. Given this diagnosis, if started with pulse intravenous human immunoglobulin (1g / kg daily for 2 days).(1) After 20 days, they disappeared anemia, liver abnormalities, pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxemia and serum ferritin level was normalized. Three years after treatment with immunoglobulin, the CT findings of the chest and the results of laboratory tests were normal and the patient had no complaints.   Discussion This was the first case report in which there was a lump combination excavated, ground-glass opacities and pulmonary consolidations in HRCT (Figure 1). This finding is important because it includes the SAM in tomographic differential diagnosis of pneumonia, lymphoma, pulmonary vasculitis, alveolar hemorrhage, tuberculosis, pneumocystis pneumonia, nocardiosis and fungal disease.(5-9) There have been only two previous reports of pulmonary involvement evidenced by HRCT in SAM.(3,4) The first described diffuse reticulonodular pulmonary opacities and septal thickening.(3) In that case, transbronchial biopsy showed thick alveolar septa and infiltrated by lymphocytes and macrophages hemofagocíticos occupying the alveolar spaces. These pathological findings are similar to our case. The patient showed improvement after treatment for SAM.(3) The second report was a case in which there was a polypoid soft mass in the nasal cavity, cervical lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly, and a pulmonary nodule of 25 mm in the lower lobe of the right lung seen in chest CT.(4) In that case, two separate biopsies (nasal and lymph node) revealed extensive benign proliferation of macrophages with hemosiderin hemofagocíticos and lymphocytic infiltrates. These findings are similar to ours, as well as those accepted in the literature as being diagnosed with SAM.(1-4) In that study, complete regression of nasal polyps, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy and was observed as well as a lung nodule following treatment SAM. The different tomographic presentations of MAS (nodules, reticulonodular opacities, opacities and consolidation glass) may correspond to the presence of macrophages and lymphocytic infiltration, to varying degrees, the alveolar spaces and septa, similar to what occurs in desquamative interstitial pneumonia and pneumonia lymphocytic interstitial.(10.11) establishes the diagnosis of SAM when at least five of the following criteria are met: fever; bicytopenia; hypertriglyceridemia; hemophagocytosis; level of serum ferritin > 500 mg / L; splenomegaly; low activity of natural killer cells; and increased serum levels of sCD25.(1) Our case met the five criteria, with secondary SAM to adrenal tumor. In addition, the extremely high level of serum ferritin, and the results of bone marrow aspirate and transbronchial biopsy compatible with SAM, together with the excellent response to treatment with immunoglobulin (resolution of pulmonary, hepatic and haematological disorders), prove the diagnosis SAM with pulmonary involvement. In conclusion, patients with SAM may have respiratory failure and diffuse ground-glass opacities and consolidations proven by HRCT, simulating severe pneumonia or alveolar hemorrhage. Furthermore, the diagnosis of SAM should be especially seen in patients with concurrent liver changes, cytopenias or elevated serum ferritin levels. Therefore, this clinical profile should lead pulmonologists to suspect this potentially lethal condition, allowing rapid diagnosis and treatment, which are essential for us to achieve favorable outcomes.   