SUMMARY Macrophage activation syndrome is a rare and potentially fatal disease. It occurs due to alterations to the nervous system, with excessive macrophage proliferation, typically causing hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia and liver dysfunction. In this article we report a very unusual case of macrophage activation syndrome manifested as respiratory failure, as well as the first description of an excavated nodule combined with ground-glass opacities and consolidations, found on lung HRCT scans (simulating pneumonia or alveolar hemorrhage). The subsequent treatment with human immunoglobulin was sucessful.
 We therefore recommend that macrophage activation syndrome be considered in the differential diagnosis of respiratory failure causes; rapid diagnosis and treatment is crucial to the patient's favorable outcome. Keywords: Macrophage activation; Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; computed X-ray tomography; Interstitial lung diseases.     Introduction Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS), also known as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis or hemophagocytic syndrome, is a rare and potentially fatal disease. It occurs due to immune dysregulation, manifested as excessive macrophage proliferation, in response to a triggering agent, such as infections, rheumatic diseases or tumors.
 In general, the clinical presentation of MAS includes sudden fever onset, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, pancytopenia and hepatic dysfunction.
 The histologic finding consists of  macrophage phagocytosis by erythrocytes (which degrades the erythrocytes, producing hemosiderin) in the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes or lungs, without significant pleomorphism and mitotic activity.
(1-4) In this article we report the first case in which diffuse ground-glass opacities accompanied by pulmonary consolidations, simulating severe pneumonia, were observed in high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scans of an adult individual with MAS.   Case report A 71-year-old man, recently diagnosed with Cushing's syndrome due to an adrenal tumor, complained of coughing, dyspnea and fever. Physical tests showed that peripheral oxygen saturation in room air reached 88%.
 Laboratory tests revealed anemia, thrombocytopenia and high levels of hepatic aminotransferase, as well as cholestasis, hypertriglyceridemia and extremely high serum ferritin levels (10.580 µg/L; normal range, 20-250 µg/L). A normal magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography and a normal ultrasound ruled out the biliary system obstruction hypothesis.
 A bone marrow aspiration was conducted In order to investigate the anemia, and the results were consistent with the MAS diagnosis. The apiration culture results were negative. A chest CT scan revealed an excavated nodule, along with ground-glass opacities and consolidations (Figure 1). A bronchoscopy was then performed. Bronchoalveolar lavage cultures were negative, and a transbronchial biopsy of the right lower lobe revealed abundant macrophages with hemosiderin in the alveolar spaces, as well as the absence of significant pleomorphism or mitotic activity.
 There was a lymphocytic infiltration in the alveolar septa, which had thickened.
 These histologic findings are also consistent with MAS. Given this diagnosis, pulse therapy with intravenous human immunoglobulin as initiated (1g/kg daily for 2 days).(1) After 20 days, the anemia, hepatic alterations, pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxemia disappeared, while serum ferritin levels were normalized.
 Three years after the immunoglobulin treatment, chest CT findings and laboratory test results were normal, and the patient reported no complaints.   Discussion: This was the first case report in which HRCT scans revealed a combination of excavated lump, ground-glass opacities and pulmonary consolidations (Figure 1).
 This is an important finding because it includes MAS in the tomographic differential diagnosis of pneumonia, lymphoma, pulmonary vasculitis, alveolar hemorrhage, tuberculosis, pneumocystis, nocardiosis and fungal disease.
(5-9) Only two previous studies reported HRCT-proven pulmonary involvement in MAS.
(3,4) The first one described diffuse reticulonodular pulmonary opacities and septal thickening.(3) In that case, a transbronchial biopsy revealed thick alveolar septa infiltrated by lymphocytes, and hemophagocytic macrophages occupying the alveolar spaces. These pathological findings are similar to those of our case. The patient showed improvement after the MAS treatment.(3) The second report refers to a case in which there was a polypoid soft mass in the nasal cavity, a cervical lymphadenopathy and a hepatosplenomegaly, in addition to a 25mm pulmonary nodule in the lower lobe of the right lung, revealed by the chest CT scan. 
(4) In that case, two separate biopsies (nasal and lymph node) revealed an extensive benign proliferation of hemophagocytic macrophages with hemosiderin and lymphocytic infiltrates. These findings are similar to ours, as well as to those described in the literature as being  diagnostic of MAS.(1-4) In that sample, a complete regression of the nasal polyps,lymphadenomegaly and hepatosplenomegaly, as well as of a lung nodule, was observed after MAS treatment.
 The different MAS tomographic presentations  (nodules, reticulonodular opacities, ground-glass opacities and consolidation) may suggest the presence of macrophages and lymphocytic infiltration, to varying degrees, in alveolar spaces and septa, as in desquamative interstitial pneumonia and lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia.(10.11) MAS is diagnosed when at least five of the following criteria are met: fever; bicytopenia; hypertriglyceridemia; hemophagocytosis; serum ferritin level > 500 μg/L; splenomegaly; low natural killer cell activity; and increased serum levels of sCD25.
(1) Our case met the first five criteria, with  MAS  being  secondary  to  the  adrenal  tumor. 
 Furthermore, the extremely high level of serum ferritin, as well as the MAS-consistent bone marrow aspiration and transbronchial biopsy results, together with the excellent response to immunoglobulin therapy (resolution of pulmonary, hepatic and haematological disorders), support the diagnosis of MAS with pulmonary involvement.
 In conclusion, MAS patients may present respiratory failure, as well as HRCT-proven diffuse ground-glass opacities and consolidations, simulating severe pneumonia or alveolar hemorrhage. Furthermore, the diagnosis of MAS should be particularly considered in patients with concomitant hepatic alterations, cytopenias or high ferritin serum levels. Therefore, this clinical profile should lead pulmonologists to suspect this potentially lethal condition, enabling prompt diagnosis and treatment, which are crucial to favorable outcomes.   