 ABSTRACT macrophage activation syndrome is a rare disease and potentially fatal. It occurs due to a change in the immune system, with excessive proliferation of macrophages, often causing hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia and liver dysfunction. In this article, we report a very rare presentation of macrophage activation syndrome as respiratory insufficiency, as well as the first description of nodule excavated, frosted glass and consolidation in the high resolution computed tomography of the lung (simulating a pneumonia, or hemorrhage alveolar) and the therapeutic success with the use of human immunoglobulin. Thus, we suggest that the macrophage activation syndrome is placed in the differential diagnosis of causes of respiratory failure, and rapid diagnosis and treatment is imperative to the good evolution of the patient. Descriptors: Activation of macrophages; Linfohistiocitose hemophagocytic; computed Tomography X-ray; lung Diseases, interstitial. Introduction macrophage activation syndrome (MAS), also known as syndrome hemophagocytic or linfohistiocitose hemophagocytic, is a rare and potentially fatal. Occurs due to the dysregulation and immune response that manifests itself as an excessive proliferation of macrophages in response to the agent triggering, such as infections, rheumatic diseases, or tumors. In general, the clinical presentation of SAM includes fever of sudden onset, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, pancytopenia, and liver dysfunction. The finding of histological consists in the phagocytosis of macrophages by erythrocytes (which degrades the erythrocytes, producing hemossiderina) in the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, or lungs, without based or activity mitótica significant. (1-4) we Report here the first case in which opacities diffuse frosted glass accompanied by consolidations of the lungs, simulating pneumonia severe, were seen in the high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of an individual adult with SAM. Case report A man of 71 years of age, recently diagnosed with Cushing's syndrome due to an adrenal tumor, he complained of cough, dyspnea and fever. On physical examination, the peripheral oxygen saturation in ambient air was 88%. The laboratory tests revealed anemia, plaquetopenia, and elevated levels of aminotransferase in liver, in addition to cholestasis, hypertriglyceridemia, and an extremely high level of serum ferritin (10.580 µg/L; normal range, 20-250 µg/L). The cholangiopancreatography by magnetic resonance imaging and ultra-sonography normal, ruled out the hypothesis of an obstruction of the biliary system. In order to investigate the anemia, was performed, bone marrow aspiration, the results of which were compatible with the diagnosis of SAM. Culture results of aspiration were negative. A CT scan of the chest revealed a nodule excavated, along with glass opacities and consolidations (Figure 1). Held-if, then, a bronchoscopy. The cultures of lavado broncoalveolar were negative, and a biopsy transbrônquica lower lobe right showed abundant macrophages with hemossiderina in the spaces alveolar, as well as the absence of based on significant or activity mitótica. There was infiltration of lymphocytes in the septa alveolar, which showed thickening. These findings histology are also compatible with the SAM. Considering this diagnosis, started pulsoterapia with intravenous human immunoglobulin (1 g/kg daily for 2 days). (1) After 20 days, have disappeared, anemia, changes in liver, lung infiltrates and hypoxia, and the level of serum ferritin has normalized. Three years after treatment with immunoglobulin, the findings of CT of the thorax and the results of the laboratory tests were normal and the patient did not present complaints. Discussion This was the first reported case in which it has been observed the combination of lump dug-glass opacities and consolidations of the lungs on HRCT (Figure 1). This finding is important because it includes the SAM in the diagnostics ct differential of pneumonia, lymphoma, vasculitis, pulmonary hemorrhage, alveolar, tb, pneumocistose, nocardiose and disease fungal. (5-9) There have only been two previous reports of pulmonary involvement proven by HRCT in SAM. (3,4) first described opacities pulmonary reticulonodulares diffuse thickening and septal. (3) in That case, the biopsy transbrônquica showed septa alveolar thickened and infiltrated by lymphocytes as well as macrophages hemofagocíticos occupying the spaces alveolar. These pathological findings are similar to those of our case. The patient showed improvement after treatment for SAM. (3) The second report was a case in which there was soft mass polypoid nasal cavity, linfoadenomegalia cervical and hepatosplenomegaly, in addition to a nodule the lung of 25 mm in the lower lobe of the right lung seen on CT scan of the chest. (4) in That case, two biopsies, separate the nasal and lymph node) revealed extensive proliferation of benign macrophages hemofagocíticos with hemossiderina and infiltrated linfocíticos. These findings are similar to our own, as well as those accepted in the literature as being diagnostic of the SAM. (1-4) in That study, it was observed complete regression of nasal polyps, linfoadenomegalia and hepatosplenomegaly, as well as a nodule in lung after treatment for SAM. The different presentations tomographic (SAM nodules, opacities reticulonodulares, - glass opacities and consolidation) may correspond to the presence of macrophages, and infiltration of lymphocytic, in varying degrees, of the spaces, alveolar and septa, as occurs in interstitial pneumonia descamativa and interstitial lymphocytic pneumonia. (10,11) Establishes the diagnosis of SAM when at least five of the following criteria are met: fever; bicitopenia; hypertriglyceridemia; hemofagocitose; level of serum ferritin > 500 µg/L; splenomegaly; low activity of the cells all just fuckin ' killer natural; and increased serum levels of sCD25. (1) Our case met the first five criteria, with SAM secondary to adrenal tumor. In addition, the extremely high level of serum ferritin, as well as the results of the aspirate and bone marrow biopsy transbrônquica compatible with SAM, along with the excellent response to treatment with immunoglobulin (resolution of changes in pulmonary, hepatic and hematologic), prove the diagnosis of SAM with pulmonary involvement. In conclusion, patients with SAM may present with respiratory insufficiency, as well as opacities diffuse frosted glass, and commits evidenced by HRCT, simulating severe pneumonia or bleeding alveolar. In addition, the diagnosis of SAM should be especially considered in patients with changes in liver concomitant, cytopenias or elevated levels of serum ferritin. Consequently, this clinical profile should take the pulmonologists to suspect this condition potentially lethal, allowing for quick diagnosis and treatment, which are essential to achieve outcomes favorable. 