OBJECTIVE SUMMARY: To determine the morphological changes of the right ventricle in pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum (APSI) for an evaluation of candidates for the different therapeutic procedures currently available. METHODS: Subjected to cineangiocardiographic study using axial projections 31 patients with ages ranging from 1 to 50 days (x = 9.6), and 28 were studied on the 1Âº month of life. In the Statistical analysis the X² and the calculated confidence interval of 95% (95), were used, the Kruskal-Wallis test for the mean and standard deviation and multiple regression. Considered significant when alpha < 0.05. RESULTS: Patients were divided into 3 groups according to angiographic morphology of the right ventricle (RV): Group A - VD tripartite (n = 16); Group B - VD bipartite (n = 9) and C group - VD unipartide (n = 6). The tricuspid valve diameter was 10.28 ± 2.67 mm (H); 7.82 ± 3.41 (B) 5.27 ± 0.57 (c) (p = 0.0005). Pulmonary atresia was the valve in all group A and infundibular in all group C (p < 0.0001). The coronary-cavitary connections were infrequent (2/16) in the group A and in all group of the group C (p = 0.0006), with retrograde opacification of the aorta (RV flow to the aorta) in 2 patients in group A and in all of group C (p = 0.0003). In 3 patients (2 in group C and 1 in group A) dependent coronary circulation VD was observed. Moderate/severe tricuspid regurgitation alone tended to be more frequent in group A (p = 0.0525). The angle that the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta was: 104.06 ± 8.98 in group A; 79.17 ± 33.08 in group B and 39.0 ± 6.52 in group C (p = 0.0016). The correlation between the tricuspid valve diameter and the angle between the ductus arteriosus with the descending aorta was of 0.6568 (p = 0.0002). CONCLUSION: Because of the heterogeneity of RV morphology in patients with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum, it is necessary to know all this information in selecting candidates for the different therapeutic procedures. Keywords: pulmonary atresia; ductus arteriosus; congenital heart disease; prognostic factors; pulmonary valvotomy.     In 1839, Peacock in his series had documented seven cases of pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum; however the first report was by himself Peacock, attributed to John Hunter1 in 1783. Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum is 1 to 3% of cardiac malformations, however, the neonatal period, it is responsible for one third of cyanotic heart disease 2-5. Its etiology is not fully understood, although some researchers claim inflammatory and infectious causes, as well as any familiar incidence 6-8. Extracardiac abnormalities are infrequent, although communications between the coronary arteries and the right ventricle may occur in approximately 50% of casos9-14. The first surgical approach to the pulmonary atresia, with intact ventricular septum, was, according to Kirklin and Barratt-Boyes, attributed to Greenwold and cols 15, that proposed that a treatment strategy based on ventricular morphology. The treatment was aimed at the performance of a pulmonary valvotomy in infants with right ventricular cavity of normal dimensions. Palliative procedures developed by Glenn, Blalock-Taussig, and Waterston were later replaced by corrective techniques in order to unclog the right ventricular outflow tract and pulmonary valve, increasing pulmunar blood flow 16-18 and, therefore, reestablishing the continuity of the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery. All efforts and surgical attempts have been suffering since the beginning, numerous modifications, but the selection of patients for surgery always has been based on the size of the right ventricular cavity, the anatomy and function of the tricuspid valve and the presence of coronary-cavitary connections 3, 19-30. The surgical techniques that have been used: valvotomy with hypothermia or cardioplegia with cardiopulmonary bypass; pulmonary valvectomia and transanular patch 3, 19-30. With the development of interventional procedure techniques, pediatric interventions have emerged, cardiac catheterization, a new alternative for the treatment of malformations and that for its efficiency and low incidence of complications, increasingly comes asserting as a very attractive form of treatment for a large number of investigators 31-41. The aim of our study was to look through the angiographic study, provide information that was essential for the selection of candidates for the various treatment alternatives that are currently available for this malformation.   Methods In a period of 10 years were studied under the angiocardiographic point of view, 31 patients with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. Nineteen patients were male with ages ranging from 1 to 50 days (x = 9.6), and 28 were studied in the first month of life. The right ventriculography placed in craniocaudal and lateral position, aimed to demonstrate: 1) degree of tricuspid regurgitation; 2) diameter of the tricuspid valve 42; 3) presence of coronary-chamber and coronary circulation of right dependent ventricle (severe stenoses proximal in native coronary territory, mainly anterior descending and circumflex - complete obstructions in proximal points of the native coronary circulation - fistula between the native coronary territory and the right ventricle - no left coronary connection with aorta, originating in the pulmonary artery) and 4) right ventricular morphology, according to Goor and Lillehei43 and Bull and cols44. The left ventriculography in anterior oblique elongated left aimed: 1) evaluation of the size and left ventricular configuration; 2) opacification of the aorta and from its visualization determine the angle formed by the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta; 3) visualization of the right and left coronary arteries and establish the type of ventricular perfusion (anterograde: from the aorta to the right ventricle during diastole). The dichotomous data was analyzed by X² (chi square) being calculated confidence interval of 95% (95). Descriptive data was expressed as mean ± standard deviation and the Kruskal-Wallis test. Continuous variables were correlated using multiple regression. It was considered significant when alpha = 0.05.   Results Age at the time of cardiac catheterization was distributed: in 23 patients, the first 7 days of life; 5, between 30 degrees and 8th day of life; and only 3 between 31st and 50th day of life. According to the type of right ventricular morphology angiocardiográfico44 the study, 31 patients were divided into three groups: group A) consisting of 16 patients, with right ventricular morphology tripartite (inlet portion, trabecular portion and output portion). In 1 patient the tricuspid valve was dysplastic (fig. 1-C). Only in one patient, the tricuspid regurgitation was not observed (fig. 2a). The only patients in whom we viewed the presence of coronary-cavitary connections had a smaller diameter tricuspid valve (7.2 to 8.7 mm) than the average group. In 1 patient the opacification of the aorta occurred mainly through the right coronary artery (Fig. 2a). In all patients, pulmonary atresia was valvular by imperforation (fig. 1) and the angle of the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta was obtuse in all (fig. 3a and 4). In this group, only 8 patients using prostaglandin; group B) consisting of 9 patients with bipartite right ventricular morphology (inlet portion and outlet portion). In 6 patients the tricuspid regurgitation was absent or mild (Fig. 5a). In 2 patients, the opacification of the aorta was retrograde (the right ventricle to the aorta) and was carried out by both coronary arteries (Fig. 5b), and in one of them, there was significant stenosis in coronary-cavitary / left coronary connection and was considered as dependent coronary circulation VD (fig. 2b). The diameter of the tricuspid valve of these two patients was smaller (5.3 and 5.8 mm) than the group average. In three patients the atretic segment was not at the level of the imperforate valve, the infundibulum ended on the blind fornix (fig. 2B and 5A). In 2 patients, the ductus arteriosus had a completely different morphology; It was thin, twisted and formed with the descending aorta an acute angle (Fig. 3b). In the 3rd patient, opacification of the aorta did not allow the visualization of the ductus arteriosus. Of the 9 patients, 6 were using prostaglandin; group C) this group was characterized in the angiographic study by the non-opacification of infundibular and trabecular portions, leaving the small right ventricle only the entry portion (unipartide). Two patients had moderate tricuspid regurgitation severe (Fig. 2c). Retrograde coronary perfusion in 2 patients, was made through both coronary arteries. In 2 patients, only for the left coronary artery and the remaining 2, on the right. The anterograde coronary perfusion could not be identified in 1 patient. In another patient (Fig. 3c), it was possible to opacification of the right ventricle from the aorta, the large size of the coronary-cavitary connection, forming a fistula that allowed this vessel flow theft right ventricular cavity. This observation was confirmed by the finding of a oximetric between the right ventricle and the right atrium. This and other patient had coronary circulation right ventricle dependent. Only in 1 patient it was not possible to show the morphology of the ductus arteriosus. In all, the ductus arteriosus formed with the descending aorta, an acute angle (Fig. 3c). All patients in this group used prostaglandin.                     The results are summarized in Table I and II. The moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation tended to be more frequent in group A. T C Group was characterized by the presence of coronary-cavitary connections with retrograde coronary perfusion of the right ventricle into the aorta during systole in all patients. The site of pulmonary atresia was valvular in all group A (95% - 75.9% to 100%) and infundibular in all of the group C (95% - 51.7% to 100%) (p < 0.0001). The tricuspid valve diameter was lower (6.66 ± 1.76 mm) when absent tricuspid insufficiency or mild, and higher (10.67 ± 3.25 mm) when moderate or severe degree of tricuspid regurgitation (p = 0.0009). The angle between the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta was obtuse (104,06Âº ± 8,98Âº) in group A and acute (39,00Âº ± 6,52Âº) in group C (p = 0.0016). The correlation between the diameter of the tricuspid valve and the angle of the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta was 0.6568 (p = 0.0002) (Fig. 6).     Discussion The major morphological changes in pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum are related to the tricuspid valve, trabecular portion and outlet right ventricle. As in pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum there is no right ventricular communication with the pulmonary artery, the possibility of a patient survive after birth is very small. Thus, the pulmonary blood supply is made by the ductus arteriosus and exceptionally, by systemic-pulmonary collaterals. The problem is that, in almost all cases, the ductus arteriosus begins the closing process soon after birth, and, exceptionally, remains functioning after 30 degrees day of extra-uterine life. In recent years, several researchers45, 46 have been calling attention to the importance of the development of the ductus arteriosus in congenital heart diseases and in particular in the critical obstruction of the exit chamber of the right ventricle, where persistence is essential to survival47, 48. He has been described as a small caliber of a vascular structure, tortuous and that forms, with the descending aorta, a lower angle < 90º 49. These characteristics differ completely from those observed in normal newborn, that the direction of the fetal flow, presents a ductus arteriosus of large caliber, which, at the junction with the descending aorta, form an angle greater than 90 degrees. Contrary to what has been described in the literature, we have observed patients with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum, with the angiocardiographic study, a ductus arteriosus normally developed and angled with the descending obtuse aorta 7. In our series, 5 of 6 patients in group C showed an ductus arteriosus with morphology classically described in the literature. It is possible that when the pulmonary obstruction is complete early in fetal life, the ductus arteriosus change their usual morphology, reducing its size, increasing its tortuosity and changing the angle between the pulmonary artery and the descending aorta, leaving to be obtuse. Such a change, in its configuration, would be explained by the absence of the normal flow antegrade pulmonary artery to the aorta, since the earliest stages of fetal life. The flow would only occur from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. This abnormal ductal morphology is also observed in patients with pulmonary atresia with VSD, in which it is postulated that pulmonary atresia occurs in even earlier stages in fetal life. Already all 16 patients in group A had ductus arteriosus larger caliber and that formed with the descending aorta, an obtuse angle. In such cases, obstruction at the level of the pulmonary valve, certainly became progressively more severe during fetal life and at birth gets imperforate as the end result of this process. Therefore, it is more likely to encounter a pulmonary atresia membranous type with imperforate valve in patients with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum that have a ductus arteriosus normally morphology, forming an obtuse angle with the descending aorta. In contrast, in patients with ductus arteriosus with aberrant morphology, it is most likely the finding of the infundibular muscular atresia. It is interesting to know that the age difference between group A patients (older) and group B and C probably occurred due to the greater severity of clinical manifestations in patients in the last group, which had more unfavorable anatomies. Like all newborns with congenital heart disease with pulmonary atresia where the pulmonary blood flow depends on the permeability of the ductus arteriosus, patients with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum should be kept under continuous infusion of prostaglandin to setting strategy terapeutic 50-53. The effects of the action of prostaglandins on the angiographic morphology are unknown and can not be discarded. It is speculated due to the large effect of pulmonary vasodilator and patent ductus arteriosus exerted by prostaglandins, there is a tendency to decrease the angle formed by the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta and subsequent reorientation of increased flow from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. In pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum, the main goal of treatment is to promote patency of the right ventricular outflow tract, either by thoracotomy or percutaneously in order to stimulate the intracavitary flow, reduce the degree of hypertrophy, improving compliance ventricular, and enable the growth of the ventricular cavity to enable a biventricular repair. In practical terms, however, all of the actual literature agrees that not for all patients these procedures are indicated. This limitation is justified by the morphofunctional spectrum that these patients; hence, the need for knowledge of the heterogeneity existing among carriers of the disease. In the selection of patients, all the initial attention should be focused on the size or dimensions of the right ventricle. However, the difficulty lies in the appreciation of the right ventricular size, because, unlike the left, it does not present a geometric model in which its volume can be reliably calculated. In addition, pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum, the degree of opacity of the trabecular portion is variable and therefore all measures used to calculate its real volume will certainly be an error in its correct estimate. Due to the distortions in the right ventricular morphology, evaluation of its volume is accepted with some restrictions, since the application of Simpson or Dodge formula would not be properly used in hearts with bizarre geometry. Before the obstacle to inferring right ventricular volume, an important parameter in the selection of candidates for the different therapeutic procedures available, Zuberbuhler et al54, in anatomical study found a relationship between the diameter of the tricuspid valve and the size of the right ventricle, the increase in diameter of the tricuspid valve considered a growth indicator of the right ventricle. More recently, researchers have been using an index named z that provides subsidies of right ventricular size and the tricuspid valve. The z-index is obtained by the equation z = measured diameter - mean normal value / standard deviation of the normal average diameter 27, 29. Thus, the presence of z - index of the tricuspid valve annulus or the diameter of the tricuspid valve < 70% of normal or else 70% of the mitral annulus diameter is a risk factor or failure for a biventricular correction15, 22. In our sample, we observed a strong correlation between the diameter of the tricuspid valve and the angle formed by the junction of the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta. This makes it possible, through the analysis of the dimensions of the tricuspid valve, be inferred from the site of pulmonary atresia (valvular or infundibular). To our knowledge, this correlation has not yet been described in the literature. Another problem, which has profound implications for prognosis and for the various treatment alternatives, concerns the importance of the coronary circulation in pulmonary atresia with incorruptible septal 55-59. This malformation is associated in 20-50% of casos53, to coronary-cavitary connections between the right ventricular cavity and the blood system coronariano60,61. These coronary-cavitary connections are considered persistent communications, not involute due to the development of supra-ventricular systemic pressure right during intra-uterina62 life. These abnormal communications during systole do not allow oxygenated blood from the right ventricle to reach one or both coronary arteries at the same time preventing or hindering their diastolic filling, due to the delay of ventricular ejection direita63. There is considerable histopathologic evidence that the myocardium of some newborns and infants, for presenting the coronary-cavitary connections between the right ventricle and coronary circulation, may have ischemic damage of variable gravity 64. Indeed, they are people with coronary circulation right ventricle dependent. It is possible that these myocardial perfusion disorders already exist during intrauterine life, because these histopathologic changes have been observed in neonates who die hours after birth 65. Therefore, patients with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum, which have coronary-cavitary connections dependent right ventricle should not have decompressed right ventricle because decompression of the hypertensive right ventricle would take the patient to a heart attack, the effective reduction in head perfusion pressure. Thus, the morphological characteristics outlined by angiography are fundamental to programming therapeutic strategy to be adopted. It is important to make clear that the type of strategy adopted fundamentally depends on the experience of each surgical group. In conclusion, pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum is important group of patients with cyanotic congenital heart disease in the neonatal period. Alternative treatment of this heterogeneous group require meticulous assessment of right ventricular size and the tricuspid valve, and especially of the coronary circulation study in the form of coronary circulation of right dependent ventricle or other coronary anomalies. Although the literature recently brought better results, not only surgical but also of interventional catheterization, mortality remains high.   