 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Determine the changes morfofuncionais of the right ventricle in pulmonary atresia with septal integrity (APSI) for an evaluation of the candidates for the different therapeutic procedures currently available. METHODS: Submitted to the study cineangiocardiográfico using projections, axial, 31 patients with ages ranging from 1 to 50 days (x=9.6 in), and 28 were studied in the 1Âº month of life. In the statistical analysis were used the X2 and calculated the confidence interval of 95% (95), the Kruskal-Wallis test for the mean and standard deviation and multiple regression. Considered significant when alpha < 0.05 to be. RESULTS: The patients were divided into 3 groups according to the morphology angiográfica of the right ventricle (RV): group A – VD tripartide (n=16); group B – VD bipartide (n=9) and group C – VD unipartide (n=6). The diameter of the tricuspid valve was 10,28 ± 2,67 mm (A); 7,82 ± 3,41 (B) and 5,27 ± 0,57 (C) (p=0,0005). Pulmonary atresia was the valve in all of the group A and infundibular in all of the group C (p<0.0001). The connections coronary-cavity were infrequent (2/16) in group A and in all of group C (p=0.0006), with opacification retrograde from the aorta (flow from the RV to the aorta) in 2 patients of group A and in all of group C (p=0.0003). In 3 patients (2 from group C and 1 group) was observed circulation coronary VD dependent. Regurgitation tricuspid moderate-severe/isolated tended to be more frequent in group A (p=0,0525). The angle of the ductus arteriosus causes the descending aorta was: 104,06 ± 8,98 in group A; 79,17 ± 33,08 in group B and 39,0 ± 6,52 in group C (p=0.0016). The correlation between the diameter of the tricuspid valve and the angle between the ductus arteriosus with the descending aorta was 0,6568 (p=0,0002). CONCLUSION: In function of the heterogeneity of the morphology of the RV in patients with pulmonary atresia with septal healthy, it becomes necessary to have knowledge of all of this information in the selection of candidates to various therapeutic procedures. Keywords: pulmonary atresia; ductus arteriosus; congenital heart disease;prognostic factors; valvulotomia of the lung. In 1839, Peacock, in his series of had already documented 7 cases of pulmonary atresia with interventricular septum intact; however, the first case described was, by the Peacock, attributed to John Hunter1, in 1783. Pulmonary atresia with interventricular septum healthy represents 1 to 3% of cardiac malformations, however, in the neonatal period, she is responsible for 1/3 of the heart cianóticas2-5. Its etiology is not fully clarified, although some researchers postulate causes inflammatory and infectious, as well as any incidence familiar6-8. The anomalies extracardíacas are infrequent, despite the fact that communications between the coronary arteries and the right ventricle may occur in approximately 50% of casos9-14. The first surgical approach of pulmonary atresia with interventricular septum, healthy, was, according to Kirklin and Barrat-Boyes, assigned to Greenwold and cols.15 that proposed a treatment strategy based on the morphology of ventricular. The treatment objective was the achievement of a valvulotomia lung in those infants with cavity right ventricular dimensions normal. The procedures palliative developed by Glenn, a Blalock-Taussig and Waterston were later replaced by corrective techniques in order to unclog the exit of the right ventricle and the pulmonary valve, increasing the blood flow pulmonar16-18, and re-establishing, thus, the continuity of the right ventricle with the pulmonary artery. All the efforts and attempts of surgery have been suffering, since the beginning, numerous changes, but always the selection of patients for surgery has been based on the size of the cavity right ventricular, the anatomy and function of the valve tricuspid and the presence of connections, the coronary artery-according to the cavity 3, 19-30. The surgical techniques that have been employed have been valvotomia with hypothermia or cardioplegia with by-pass cardiopulmonary; valvectomia pulmonary and patch transanular3, 19-30. With the development of the technical procedure of the preliminary age pediatric emerged, through cardiac catheterization, a new alternative for the treatment of this malformation and that, by its effectiveness and low incidence of complications, increasingly, it has been affirming as a form of treatment very attractive to a large number of investigadores31-41. The goal of our work was to search, through the study of angiographic, provide information that would be essential for the selection of candidates to the various treatment alternatives that currently are available to this malformation. Methods over A period of 10 years, were studied, from the point of view angiocardiographic, 31 patients with pulmonary atresia with interventricular septum healthy. Nineteen patients were male with age ranging from 1 to 50 days (x=9.6 in), and 28 were studied in the first month of life. Radioisotopic right held in position craniocaudal and lateral, was to demonstrate: 1) the degree of regurgitation tricuspid; 2) the diameter of the valve tricúspide42; 3) the presence of connections the crown-cavity, and circulation-coronary right ventricle dependent, stenosis, severe, proximal, in the territory of the coronary artery native, mainly descending earlier and circunflexa – complete obstructions at points proximal of the circulation, coronary native – fistula between the territory of the coronary artery native and the right ventricle – lack of connection of the coronary the left with the aorta, with the origin of the pulmonary artery), and 4) morphology right ventricular, according to Goor and Lillehei43 and Bull and cols44. The ventriculography the left held in anterior oblique left elongated was to: 1) evaluation of the size and configuration of the left ventricle; 2) opacification of the aorta, and from their visualization to determine the angle that the ductus arteriosus formed with the descending aorta; 3) visualization of the coronary arteries the right and left and establishing the type of perfusion ventricular (anterograde: from the aorta to the right ventricle in diastole). The data dichotomous were evaluated by the X2 (chi square) and calculated the confidence interval of 95% (95). Descriptive data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation and used the Kruskal-Wallis test. Continuous variables were correlated using multiple regression. Was considered significant when alpha = 0,05. Results The age at the time of cardiac catheterization was distributed: in 23 patients, in the first 7 days of life; 5, between the 8Âº and 30Âº day of life; and only 3 between the 31Âº and 50Âº-day life. According to the type of morphology right ventricular obtained in the study angiocardiográfico44, the 31 patients were divided into three groups: group (A) consists of 16 patients, presenting morphology right ventricular tripartide (the portion of the input portion of the trabecular and the portion of the output). In 1 patient the tricuspid valve was displásica (fig. 1-C). Only in 1 patient of group was not observed regurgitation tricuspid (fig. 2-A). The only patients in which they viewed the presence of connections coronary-cavity had a diameter of the tricuspid valve minor (with 7.2 and 8.7 mm) than the average of the group. In 1 patient the opacification of the aorta if made predominantly through the coronary right (fig. 2-A). In all patients the pulmonary atresia was by imperfuração valve (fig. 1) and the angle of the ductus arteriosus causes the descending aorta was, also in all obtuse (fig. 3 and 4). In this group only 8 patients had used prostaglandin; group B) comprised 9 patients with morphology right ventricular bipartide (lead-in portion and the portion of the output). In 6 patients the regurgitation tricuspid was absent or mild (fig. 5-A). In 2 patients the opacification of the aorta was retrograde (from the right ventricle to the aorta), and became through both the coronary (fig. 5-B), and in one of them, we observed important stenosis at the connection heart-cavitária/coronary left and was considered as non-coronary VD-dependent (fig. 2-B). The diameter of the tricuspid valve in these 2 patients was lower (by 5.3 and 5.8 mm) than the average of the group. In 3 patients the segment atrésico was not at the level of the valve imperfurada, the infundibulum ended in the bottom of the bag blind (fig. 2-B and 5-A). In 2 patients, the ductus arteriosus presented a morphology quite distinct; it was thin, tortuous, and forming with the descending aorta an acute angle (fig. 3-B). In the 3RD patient, the opacification of the aorta did not allow visualization of the ductus arteriosus. Of the 9 patients, 6 were in use of prostaglandin; group C) this group was characterized in the study angiographic by the non-opacification of the portions infundibular and trabecular, leaving the right ventricle only reduced your portion of the entry (unipartide). Two patients presented with regurgitation tricuspid moderate-severe (fig. 2-C). The coronary perfusion retrograde in 2 patients, made by both coronary arteries. In 2 patients, only by the coronary left and in the remaining 2, from the right. The coronary perfusion anterograde could not be identified in 1 patient. In another patient (fig. 3-C), it was possible to opacification of the right ventricle from the aorta, the large dimension of the connection crown-cavitária, forming a fistula that allowed the theft of the flow of this vessel to the cavity right ventricular. This observation was confirmed by the finding of a jump oximétrico between the right ventricle and the right atrium. This and another patient had a circulation coronary right ventricular dependent. Only in 1 patient was not possible, the demonstration of the morphology of the ductus arteriosus. In all, the ductus arteriosus formed, with the descending aorta an acute angle (fig. 3-C). All patients in this group made use of prostaglandin. The results are summarized in table I and II. THE tricuspid insufficiency moderate to severe presented tendency to be more frequent in group A. group C was characterized by the presence of connections the crown-cavity, with coronary perfusion retrograde from the right ventricle into the aorta in systole in all the patients. The site of pulmonary atresia was valvar in all of the group A (95% - 75,9% to 100%) and infundibular in all of the group C (95% CI - increased 51.7% to 100%) (p<0.0001). The diameter of the tricuspid valve was lower (6,66 ± 1,76 mm) when absent tricuspid insufficiency or mild, and most (10,67 ± 3,25 mm) when tricuspid insufficiency moderate or severe (p=0,0009). The angle between the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta was obtuse (104,06 than benchmark ± 8,98 than benchmark) in group A and acute (39.00 off than benchmark ± 6,52 than benchmark) in group C (p=0.0016). The correlation between the diameter of the tricuspid valve and the angle between the ductus arteriosus and the descending aorta was 0,6568 (p=0,0002) (fig. 6). Discussion of major changes morfofuncionais in pulmonary atresia with septal integrity are related to the valve tricuspid, portion of the trabecular and the output of the right ventricle. As in pulmonary atresia with septal healthy there is no communication from the right ventricle with the trunk of the pulmonary artery, the possibility of a patient to survive after birth is very small. Thus, the blood supply in the lungs is made by the ductus arteriosus and, exceptionally, by collateral systemic-pulmonary. The problem is that, in almost all cases, the ductus arteriosus begins the process of closing shortly after birth, and, exceptionally, if it keeps working after the 30Âº day life extra-uterine. In recent years, several investigadores45, 46 come calling attention to the importance of the development of ductus arteriosus in congenital heart disease and, in particular, in blockages of critical of the exit chamber of the right ventricle, where its persistence is a necessary condition to sobrevivência47, 48. He has been described as a vascular structure of small caliber, tortuous, and that way, with the descending aorta an angle less than < 90Âº49. These characteristics differ completely from those observed in the newborn normal, that by the direction of flow fetal, features a ductus arteriosus of large calibre, which, at the junction with the descending aorta, forms an angle of more than 90Âº. Contrary to what has been described in the literature, we have observed carriers of pulmonary atresia with interventricular septum intact, presenting at the study angiocardiographic, a ductus arteriosus normally developed and with angle with the descending aorta obtuse 7. In our study, 5 of the 6 patients of group C had a ductus arteriosus with a morphology classically described in the literature. It is possible that, when the obstruction of the lung is complete in early fetal life, the ductus arteriosus change their morphology usual, thus reducing their caliber, increasing their sizes and changing the angle between the pulmonary artery and the descending aorta, instead of being obtuse. Such a change in your configuration would be explained by the absence of the normal flow forward of the pulmonary artery to the aorta since the times of early fetal life. The only flow it would from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. This morphology ductal abnormal is also observed in patients with pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect, in which it has been hypothesized that the pulmonary atresia occurs in stages still more early in fetal life. All the 16 group A patients had ductus arteriosus of the highest caliber, and forming, with the descending aorta an obtuse angle. In these cases, surely the obstruction, at the level of the pulmonary valve became progressively more severe during the fetal life and at birth, find-if imperfurada as the end result of this process. Therefore, it is more likely the encounter of a pulmonary atresia-type membranous, with valve imperfurada in patients with pulmonary atresia with septal integrity who have a ductus arteriosus morphology with habitual, forming an obtuse angle with the descending aorta. In contrast, in patients with ductus arteriosus morphology, aberrant, it is more likely the meeting of the atresia type muscular infundibular. It is interesting to note the difference in age between the patients of group A (older) and those of group B and group C, probably occurred because of the increased severity of the clinical picture in the patients of the latter groups, which had anatomy more unfavorable. As all neonates with congenital heart disease with pulmonary atresia where the flow of the lung depends on the permeability of the ductus arteriosus, the patients with pulmonary atresia with septal integrity must be maintained under continuous infusion of prostaglandin up to the definition of the strategy terapêutica50-53. The effects of the action of prostaglandins on the morphology angiográfica are little known and cannot be discarded. It is speculated, in view of the large pulmonary vasodilator effect and of the ductus arteriosus, exercised by prostaglandins, and that there is a tendency to decrease the angle formed by the ductus arteriosus with the descending aorta, consequent to reorientation of the increased flow from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. In pulmonary atresia with septal healthy, the main goal of treatment is to promote the clearing of the pathway out of the right ventricle, either by thoracotomy or by way of percutaneous, with the purpose of stimulating the flow of an intracavitary, reduce the degree of hypertrophy, improving ventricular compliance, and allow for the growth of the cavity and the ventricular to make a correction biventricular. In practical terms, however, all of the current literature is in agreement that not all patients these procedures are indicated. This limitation is justified by the spectrum morfofuncional that these patients present; hence, the need of the knowledge of the heterogeneity existing between the carriers of the disease. In the selection of the patients, all the attention home should be geared to the size or dimensions of the right ventricle. However, the difficulty is in the appreciation of the size of the right ventricle, therefore, different from the left, it does not display a geometry model that can calculate reliably its volume. In addition, in pulmonary atresia with septal integrity, the degree of opacification of the portion of the trabecular is variable and, therefore, all measures used for the calculation of the actual volume will certainly introduce error in your estimate correct. In function of the distortions in the morphology right ventricular, the assessment of their volume is accepted with some restrictions, since the application of the formula of Simpson or Dodge would not be used correctly in hearts with geometry bizarre. In front of the obstacle to infer the volume ventricular right, important parameter in the selection of the candidates for the different therapeutic procedures available, Zuberbuhler and colleagues.54, in anatomical studies, found a relationship between the diameter of the valve tricuspid and the size of the right ventricle, being the increase of the diameter of the valve tricuspid considered to be an indicator of the growth of the right ventricle. More recently, researchers have been using an index called z that provides grants of sizes of the right ventricle and the valve tricuspid. The z-index is obtained by the equation: z=measured diameter – average normal value/standard deviation of the normal diameter medium 27, 29. Thus, the presence of z-index of the o-ring from the valve tricuspid or the diameter of the valve tricuspid < 70% of normal or 70% of the diameter of the ring to the mitral represents a factor of risk or failure for a fix biventricular15, 22. In our material, we observed a strong correlation between the diameter of the valve tricuspid and the angle formed by the junction of the ductus arteriosus with the descending aorta. With this it is possible, through analysis of the dimensions of the valve tricuspid, to infer the location of the atresia, pulmonary (valvular or infundibular). In our knowledge this correlation has not yet been described in the literature. Another problem, which have profound implications in the prognosis and the various treatment alternatives, concerns the importance of the circulation coronary artery in pulmonary atresia with septal íntegro55-59. This poor training is associated, in 20 to 50% of the casos53, connections and coronary-cavity between the cavity right ventricular and the arterial system coronariano60,61. These connections coronary-cavity are considered to be communications that are persistent, that is not involuíram, in consequence of the development of pressure supra-systemic right ventricular during the life of the intra-uterina62. These communications are abnormal, during systole, to allow blood is not oxygenated to the right ventricle to reach one or both coronary arteries, at the same time, preventing or hindering the filling diastolic function of the delay of ventricular ejection direita63. There is considerable evidence histopathological that the myocardium of some neonates and infants, by presenting these connections, the coronary artery-according to the cavity between the right ventricle and circulation, coronary, you can display damage ischemic severity variável64. Certainly, they are carriers of the circulation of the coronary right ventricular dependent. It is possible, that these disturbances of myocardial perfusion to already exist during intra-uterine life, since these pathological changes have been observed in neonates that die hours after birth 65. Therefore, patients with pulmonary atresia with septal healthy, that have no connections coronary-cavity right ventricle-dependent, should not have the right ventricle decompressed, because decompression of the right ventricle hypertensive would take the patient to a myocardial infarction, for reducing the effective head pressure and perfusion. Thus, the morphological features outlined by angiography are fundamental to the programming of the therapeutic strategy to be adopted. It is important to be clear that the type of strategy adopted depends, fundamentally, to the experience of each surgical group. In conclusion, pulmonary atresia with septal integrity represents an important group of patients with congenital heart disease cianótica in the neonatal period. The alternative treatment of this heterogeneous group need to meticulous evaluation of the sizes of the right ventricle and the valve tricuspid and, especially, the study of the circulation, coronary in the form of circulation-coronary right ventricle-dependent or other anomalies coronary heart. Although the literature come, recently, providing the best results not only surgical, but also through the catheterization interventional, mortality still remains high. 