ABSTRACT Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by recurrent obstruction of the upper airway during sleep that occur at the level of the pharynx. Although cephalometric analysis is an important method for diagnosis of craniofacial deformities, CT and MRI have been highlighted as the main imaging methods for research into the possible causes of OSA that, most often, is multifactorial. These methods allow an excellent evaluation in different anatomical planes of the possible site of obstruction, which allows a better clinical evaluation and surgical approach. This pictorial essay aims to describe the aspects that must be evaluated in the diagnostic imaging of the main predisposing factors for OSA. Keywords: Syndromes of sleep apnea; Magnetic resonance imaging; Computed tomography by X-ray     Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by recurrent obstruction of the upper airway during sleep, occurring at the level of the pharynx.(1) It is a chronic, progressive and high cardiovascular morbidity disease.(2) The diagnosis of OSA is confirmed by polysomnography; However, imaging studies are very important auxiliary methods in the evaluation of these patients. The cephalometric analysis, performed through radiographs, is an important method for diagnosis of craniofacial deformities, if possible, through this method, get skull base measures, the hyoid bone position, mandibular configuration, posterior air space of the pharynx, dimensions language, thickness and length of the uvula, among others. Anatomical changes in these sites may predispose the patient to AOS.(3) Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been highlighted for its ability to perform multiplanar cuts. For your best anatomical and do not use ionizing radiation resolution, MRI has been used as the primary imaging method for this type of research.(4) This article aims to describe the main aspects image of these two methods when used in the diagnostic workup of patients with OSA. The cause of OSA is most often multifactorial (5) being the result of a breakdown or thinning of the upper airway that occurs during sleep. Generally, the point of maximum narrowing of the air column of the pharynx is at the level of the lower portion of the soft palate. In the protocols to be used, the axial and sagittal images of the air column of the oropharynx and hypopharynx should always be included, as well as performing the examination time, which should be as soon as possible. The median sagittal section is crucial because it allows to characterize the airway boundary, the maxilomandibular ratio (for the evaluation of retrognathia and micrognathia), the volume of the soft palate, the format of palates, the position of the hyoid bone and the position and the tongue dorsum volume, having its normal appearance illustrated in Figure 1. The axial sections should be obtained at levels that show the nasopharynx, hypopharynx, the palate, the tongue and vocal cords.     One of the most important changes that should be researched in patient imaging with OSA is the standard of the air column in the axial CT or MRI. In normal individuals, the standard laterolateral is what we find physiologically (Figure 2).(2) soft tissue augmentation in the oropharyngeal region (fat, muscle or lymphoid) can lead to a change to a pathological pattern in the anteroposterior direction (Figure 3).         Among the causes that may predispose to OSA include: • Paralysis of vocal cords • Micrognathia and retrognathia (Figure 4) • Abnormalities of the soft palate • Increase the size of the soft palate (Figure 5) • nasal septum deviation • tonsillar hypertrophy and / or adenoids • tumors or cysts in the pharyngeal region (Figure 6) • Macroglosia (Figure 7) • the hard palate deformities: high palate (Figure 7) • Obesity (2) (as excess soft tissue in the pharynx difficult main- it open) • glossoptosis (lingual ptosis has been highlighted as a cause of OSA in children) (6-8) • low hyoid bone, ectopic thyroid and craniofacial anomalies (8) • Acromegaly Although the examination for diagnosis of OSA is the polysomnography, (2) the use of CT and especially MRI, have been established as important adjuncts methods in clinical diagnosis, preoperative assessment and post-treatment monitoring of patients who do not respond well to initial therapy. Both can provide an excellent assessment in different anatomical planes of the site of obstruction, allowing for better clinical evaluation, and better planning for a possible surgical approach.   