ABSTRACT Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by recurrent upper airway obstruction occurring at the level of the pharynx during sleep.
 Although cephalometric analysis is an important method for the diagnosis of craniofacial deformities, CT and MRI have been emerging as the main imaging methods to study the possible causes of OSA, which, in most cases, is multifactorial.
 These methods allow for an excellent evaluation of the obstruction site's various anatomical planes, which enables a better clinical assessment and surgical approach. This pictorial essay aims to describe the aspects that must be evaluated in the diagnostic imaging of the major predisposing factors for OSA.
 Keywords: Sleep apnea syndromes; MRI imaging; X-ray computed tomography.     Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by recurrent upper airway obstruction occurring at the level of the pharynx during sleep.(1) It is a chronic, progressive disease with high cardiovascular morbidity.(2) The diagnosis of OSA is confirmed by polysomnography; however, imaging studies are very important auxiliary methods in the evaluation of these patients. Cephalometric analysis, carried out with radiographs, is an important method for the diagnosis of craniofacial deformities; with this method, it is possible to measure the skull base and to determine the position of the hyoid bone, 
the configuration of the mandible, the posterior pharyngeal airspace, the dimensions of the tongue, the length and thickness of the uvula, etc.
 Anatomical changes in these sites may predispose the patient to AOS.(3) Computed tomography (TC) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been gaining recognition for their multiplanar section possibilities. Due to its better anatomical resolution and the fact that it does not use ionizing radiation, MRI has been used as the primary imaging method for this kind of research.(4) This paper aims to describe the main imaging aspects of these two methods when used in the diagnostic workup of OSA patients. In most cases, OSA causes are multifactorial (5), resulting from the collapse or narrowing of the upper airway during sleep.
 In general, the point of maximum narrowing of the pharyngeal air passage is at the lower portion of the soft palate.
 In the protocols to be used, axial and sagittal images of the oropharyngeal and hypopharyngeal air passages should always be included, as well as the schedule for the examination, which should be conducted as soon as possible.


 The median sagittal section is crucial because it allows us to characterize the airway contour, the maxillomandibular relationship (for the evaluation of retrognathia and micrognathia), the volume of the soft palate, palate shapes, the position of the hyoid bone and the position and volume of the tongue dorsum, having its normal appearance as illustrated in Figure 1
 Axial sections should be obtained at levels that display the nasopharynx, the hypopharynx, the palates, the tongue dorsum and the vocal cords.
     One of the most important changes that should be researched in imaging studies on OSA patients is the air passage pattern on the axial CT or MRI sections.
 Physiologically, normal individuals should display the laterolateral pattern (Figure 2).
(2) Soft tissue augmentation in the oropharyngeal region (fat, muscle or lymphoid) may change it into a pathological pattern in the anteroposterior direction (Figure 3).
         Causes that may predispose to OSA include: • Vocal cord paralysis • Micrognathia and retrognathia (Figure 4) • Soft palate abnormalities • Increased soft palate size (Figure 5) • Nasal septum deviation • Tonsil and/or adenoid hypertrophy • Tumors or cysts in the pharyngeal region (Figure 6) • Macroglossia (Figure 7) • Hard palate deformities: high-arched palate (Figure 7) • Obesity (2) (because excess soft tissue in the pharynx makes it difficult to keep it open) • Glossoptosis (tongue ptosis has been hoghlighted as a cause of OSA in children) (6-8) • A low hyoid bone, ectopic thyroid and craniofacial anomalies (8) • Acromegaly Although polysomnography is the method used to confirm the diagnosis of OSA (2) CT and especially MRI have been gaining recognition as important ancillary methods in clinical diagnosis, preoperative assessment and post-treatment monitoring of patients who do not respond well to the initial therapy.
 Both can provide an excellent evaluation in the various anatomical planes of the obstruction site, enabling better clinical evaluation and better planning for a possible surgical approach.
   