 SUMMARY THE obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by obstructions, recurrent upper airway during sleep that occur at the level of the pharynx. Although the analysis cefalométrica be an important method in the diagnosis of craniofacial deformities, CT and magnetic resonance imaging have been highlighting as the main imaging methods for the investigation of the possible causes of THOSE who, in most cases, it is multifactorial. These methods allow an excellent assessment in various anatomical planes of the eventual site of obstruction, which enables better clinical assessment and surgical approach. The present essay, pictorial aims to describe the aspects that must be evaluated in the diagnostic imaging of the main factors predisposing to the TO. Descriptors: Syndromes of sleep apnea; magnetic resonance Imaging; computed Tomography X-ray The obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by obstructions, recurrent upper airway during sleep, occurring at the level of the pharynx. (1) it Is a chronic disease, progressive and with high cardiovascular morbidity. (2) The diagnosis of osa is confirmed by polysomnography; however, imaging tests are helper methods which is of great relevance in the evaluation of these patients. The analysis cefalométrica, performed through the taken x-ray, it is an important method in the diagnosis of craniofacial deformities, it being possible, via this method, to obtain measures of the base of the skull, position of the bone hioide, configuration of the mandibular, the air space back of the pharynx, the dimensions of the tongue, thickness and length of the uvula, among others. The anatomical changes in these sites may predispose the patient to OSA. (3) THE CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been highlighted for its ability to conduct parting multiplanares. For your better resolution of anatomical and does not use ionizing radiation, MRI has been used as the main method of image for this type of research. (4) The present article aims to describe the main aspects of the image of these two methods when used in the diagnostic workup of patients with OSA. The cause of THE is, most often, multifactorial(5) being a result of a breakdown or thinning of the upper airway that occurs during sleep. Generally, the location of greatest thinning of the column of air in the pharynx is at the level of the lower portion of the soft palate. In the protocols to be used, the images in axial and sagitais of the column the air of the oropharynx and hypopharynx should always be included, as well as the time of completion of the examination, which should be as soon as possible. Cut the sagittal median is of fundamental importance, since it allows to characterize the contour of the airway, the relationship maxillomandibular (for the evaluation of retrognatia and micrognathia), the volume of the velum palatinum, the format of the palates, the position of the bone hioide and the position and the volume of the dorsum of the tongue, having its normal appearance illustrated in Figure 1. The axial cuts should be obtained on the levels that show the rhino-pharynx, the hypopharynx, the palates, the dorsum of the tongue and the vocal cords. One of the most important changes that must be searched in the imaging examinations of the patient with osa is the default of the column air in the axial cuts on CT or MRI. In normal individuals, the standard laterolateral is what we need to find physiologically (Figure 2). (2) The increased soft tissue in the region of the oropharynx (adipose, muscle, or lymphoid) can lead to its change to a standard pathological in the sense anteroposterior (Figure 3). Among the causes that can predispose to THE we can mention: • Paralysis of the vocal cords • Micrognathia and retrognatia (Figure 4) • Anomalies of the soft palate • Increase of the dimensions of the soft palate (Figure 5) • Deviation of the nasal septum • Hypertrophy of tonsils and/or adenoides • Tumors or cysts in the region of the pharynx (Figure 6) • Macroglossia (Figure 7) • Deformities of the hard palate: the palate ogival (Figure 7) • Obesity(2) (as the excess of soft tissue in the pharynx makes it difficult to keep it open) • Glossoptose (ptosis, lingual has been highlighted as a cause of osa in children)(6-8) • Bone hioide low, thyroid ectopic and craniofacial anomalies(8) • Acromegaly Although the examination for the diagnostic confirmation of osa is polysomnography,(2) the use of CT and, mainly, of the RM, have been developed as important methods supporting tools in clinical diagnosis, in the pre-operative evaluation and follow-up treatment of patients who do not respond well to therapy home. Both can provide an excellent assessment in various anatomical planes of the site of obstruction, allowing for a better clinical evaluation, in addition to a better planning for a possible surgical approach. 