SUMMARY Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of mortality worldwide. The ability to identify those asymptomatic individuals, the subgroup that is at higher risk of developing cardiovascular events in the future is a key step in any strategy aimed at reducing the cardiovascular event rates. The first step in cardiovascular risk stratification is the use of "global risk scores," among which the most frequently used is the Framingham score. However, previous studies have shown that although useful, the clinical scores when used alone, have limited cardiovascular risk stratification capacity in a significant portion of the population. It is in this context that the calcium score (CS) and coronary CT angiography of the coronary arteries may play a role as complementary tools for risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. Coronary EC provides important prognostic information that is incremental to clinical scores based on traditional risk factors and other diagnostic modalities, such as the determination of C-reactive protein, for example. In addition, the EC also has the potential to alter the behavior and aid in the clinical management of the patients. Have coronary angiography provides detailed assessment of the anatomy of the coronary arteries, allowing you to see not only the lumen but also the coronary arterial walls. Compared to conventional invasive coronary angiography, CT angiography has excellent accuracy to identify and mainly exclude the presence of significant obstructive lesions. In addition, it proved to be able to provide incremental prognostic information to traditional risk factors and coronary EC. Keywords: Risk assessment; Coronary angiography; coronary artery disease; computed tomography x-rays.     Introduction Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of mortality worldwide. In just one year, there are 17.3 million deaths from cardiovascular disease, of which 7.3 million secondary to atherosclerotic coronary artery disease (CAD) and 6.2 million secondary to vascular diseases cerebrais1. In Brazil alone there are more than 900,000 cases of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) annually, with more than 300,000 cases fatais2. Reducing these numbers, and the consequent reduction in morbidity and mortality related to CAD, it has been one of the main objectives of public health policies in Brazil and worldwide. However, it is known that more than half of acute coronary syndromes and sudden deaths occur in individuals previously assintomáticos3. Therefore, the ability to identify those asymptomatic individuals, the subgroup that is at higher risk of developing cardiovascular events in the future is a key step in any strategy aimed at reducing the event rates cardiovasculares4. The first step in cardiovascular risk stratification of asymptomatic individuals is the use of "global risk scores," among which the scores of Framingham, PROCAM (Munster Heart Study), SCORE, Reynolds, etc. Of these, the Framingham score is most often used. This type of evaluation is relatively simple to perform, does not bring risks to patients, provides valuable prognostic information and has great potential to change clinical management. Therefore, the overall risk assessment scores should always be performed as a first step in cardiovascular risk stratification of individuals assintomáticos5. But a key question is the following: the use only of clinical scores is enough? The fact is that previous studies have shown that these scores also have limitations. According Greenland et al 3, 50% of patients with acute coronary syndromes have been classified as intermediate risk by the Framingham score if they had been assessed before the event agudo3. In the same study, the authors showed that about 40% of the population would also be classified in the intermediate risk group. Above all, they have shown that 75% of patients with previously asymptomatic acute coronary syndromes did not meet criteria for treatment with statins before the acute event. These data illustrate the concept that, although very useful, clinical scores when used alone, have limited cardiovascular risk stratification capacity in a significant portion of the population. In fact, these limitations are even more significant in younger and those females. It is precisely in this context that some laboratory and imaging tests, among which the calcium score (CS) and coronary CT angiography of the coronary arteries, can play an important role as complementary tools to clinical scores in the risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. The recent advent of computed tomography (CT) with multiple detectors is causing a revolution in diagnostic and prognostic research strategies in cardiologia6-11. The evaluation of the anatomy and coronary atherosclerotic burden, previously only possible through invasive tests (invasive coronary angiography, intravascular ultrasound, etc.) Can now be obtained non-invasively and with great accuracy through cardiac CT. In practice, the use of CT for evaluation of CAD can occur in two main ways: by determining the coronary EC and by itself coronary angiography. Although angiography presents excellent accuracy to identify or exclude the presence of significant obstructive lesions, and be able to provide valuable information prognósticas6, the most robust diagnostic modality and validated to stratify global cardiovascular risk is the EC coronariano5,12,13. In this review, we discuss the notions basic techniques, the main clinical applications and the available scientific evidence on the two methods: the EC and coronary angiography, mainly focusing on their roles as tools in the stratification of overall cardiovascular risk. coronary calcium score Examination Initially, before the advent of CT devices with multiple detectors, the method used to evaluate the EC was coronary computed tomography for electron-beam (Electron-beam computed tomography). In fact, much of the accumulated scientific literature on coronary EC is based on this técnica14. However, currently, CT electron beam emission is an outdated diagnostic modality and virtually out of our midst. With the introduction of CT with multiple detectors in the late 90s, this became the method used to evaluate the coronary EC in clinical practice, revealing at least comparable, and in many ways superior to CT beam emission electrons for this purpose. So in this chapter, all the technical considerations for the acquisition of CE images refer to CT with multiple detectors. The determination of coronary EC is based on a contrast of not acquiring a series of axial sections of 3 mm thickness covering the whole extension of the heart. Images are acquired synchronized to the electrocardiogram signal (ECG). The synchronization protocol the ECG may be prospective or retrospective. The radiation dose used in the retrospective acquisition protocols is significantly higher, therefore, the prospective protocols are most commonly used. In practice, the effective radiation dose in a prospective acquisition is low, generally below 1.5 mSv and, on average, about 0.9 to 1.1 mSv. Calcification is defined as a hyperattenuating lesion with signal intensity above 130 Hounsfield units (HU) and the area > 3 adjacent pixels (at least 1 mm2). It can be calculated from the weighted sum of the densities above 130 HU (Agatston score) or methods that determine the volume or mass of calcium. Although scores of volume or calcium mass show better reproducibility, large banks of population data describing the distribution of coronary calcification according to age, ethnicity and sex of patients, are based on the Agatston score and therefore this it is the most widely used in clinical practice (Figure 1). There remains the question: How are classified and interpreted the results of coronary EC? There are two ways to classify the obtained CE values: using fixed cutoff points or cutting points adjusted for age, sex, and more recently, ethnicity of the patient. The limit values ​​more accepted in two types of classification are described in Table 1.     In the classification by fixed cutoffs, patients are categorized according to pre-established limits. In the rating points of adjusted cuts, patients are categorized according to percentiles of the distribution RE values ​​from the general population (Fig. 2). It is important to note, however, that both forms of classification provide valuable prognostic information and, in general, both are present in the reports issued in diagnostic centers qualified for cardiac imaging. Initially, coronary EC has been used as a diagnostic tool to identify or rule out the presence of obstructive CAD in symptomatic patients. These initial studies have shown that the EC has great negative predictive value (NPV) to exclude the presence of significant CAD (96% to 100%), but the positive predictive value (PPV) was at most moderado14. In contrast, more recent studies have shown that, particularly in younger or in populations with high prevalence of significant CAD patients, in addition to VPP positive inadequate, the EC also features VPN insufficient to exclude the presence of significant obstructive disease. In fact, Gottlieb et al 15 showed that in a population with 56% prevalence of significant CAD, even 19% of patients with CS = 0 had at least one obstructive lesion > 50% on coronary angiography invasiva15. Considering only moderate VPP and conflicting data regarding the VPN, the current concept is that, in general, coronary EC should not be used as a tool for the diagnosis of significant obstructive CAD in symptomatic patients. As we shall see, the real value of coronary EC in clinical practice lies in its ability to provide valuable prognostic information and serve as an important tool for risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. Prognostic value An important concept to understand why the coronary EC has the potential to play a role in cardiovascular risk stratification is that coronary calcification is a marker of the presence of atherosclerotic plaques in the coronary arteries. Coronary arterial bed, calcification occurs almost exclusively in the context of atherosclerotic disease. In a given individual, the amount of this calcification in the coronary arteries correlates well with total coronary atherosclerotic burden. However, not all atherosclerotic plaque is calcified. In fact, previous reports showed that the calcified portion represents only about 20% of the total volume of the plate; ie coronary calcification represent only the "tip of the iceberg" of the DAC; with the portion not calcified accounting for about 80% of the total atherosclerotic burden. It is important to underline that the presence or absence of calcium is not significantly associated with the degree of inclination than a specified adapter must rupture, and that the presence of calcification is not a signal of "stability" and not of "instability" of any plate. Several longitudinal population studies involving large numbers of patients have shown that the EC coronary significantly associated with the occurrence of major cardiovascular events (death from all causes, cardiac death and nonfatal) in the monitoring medium and long term. The greater the amount of calcium in the coronary arteries, the greater the chance the patient has a cardiovascular event in the future. Even more important, a number of previous studies have shown that the EC's ability to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events is further risk stratification by the Framingham score and other methods also used to stratify the risk, as the dosage of C-reactive protein , for example. Indeed, a clássico16 study showed that patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score and EC > 300 had a cardiovascular event rate of 2.8% / year (roughly equivalent to a rate of 28% in 10 years), that put them at high risk ( > 20% in 10 years). A recent consensus published by the ACCF / AHA on the use of coronary EC in assessing cardiovascular risk global12 examined the combined data from six major studies including 27,622 asymptomatic patients and evaluated the main predictors of a total of 395 cardiovascular events. Among the 11,815 patients with CS = 0, the event rate was very low, only 0.4% in the 3 to 5 years thereafter. Compared to patients with CS = 0, those with CS between 100 and 400 had a relative risk (RR) of 4.3 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 3.5 to 5.2, p < 0,0001), those with CS between 400 and 1000 showed an RR of 7.2 (95% CI 5.2 to 9.9, p < 0.0001) and those with CS > 1000 10 showed an RR , 8 (95% CI 4.2 to 27.7; p < 0.0001). Since the publication of that consensus, other prospective studies have confirmed these findings and showed that the association between EC and prognosis is similar regardless of gender or ethnicity of paciente14,17. Even more important, these studies also confirmed that the assessment of the EC is able to provide incremental prognostic information to the assessment of traditional risk factors only. In ROC analysis, the area under the curve for predicting cardiovascular events was significantly higher in coronary CEs than the Framingham scores or PROCAM. In the MESA study, the statistical "C", considering only the traditional risk factors, it was 0.79 to predict major cardiovascular events, and 0.83 when the EC information was associated with risk factors (p = 0.006) 17. Previous studies have also shown that coronary EC provides additional prognostic information for assessment of C-reactive protein. In four studies based on multivariate models, the EC remained an independent predictor of major cardiovascular events, while the C-reactive protein is no longer a significant predictor in the analysis multivariadas18-21. When compared to measure the thickness of the intima / media of the carotid artery (IMT), the EC coronary proved to be a better predictor of subsequent events; the hazard ratio (HR) of IMT was 1.7 (95% CI 1.1 to 2.7; p = 0.07), while the RH of EC was 8.2 (95% CI 4 5 to 15.1; p = 0.001) 22. Potential to alter the clinical management In addition to its role as a risk stratification tool, another important aspect related to coronary EC relates to its potential value as an instrument to change the clinical management and assist in the management of patients with suspected CAD. In an observational study, Kalia et al 23 showed that the rate of use of lipid-lowering medications in patients with dyslipidemia increased from 44% to over 90% in those with severe calcification in assessing the EC23. Other preventative behavioral measures, such as regular exercise and adopting healthier diets also showed improvement in the subgroup with higher EC values. Above all, in a prospective study that followed 1,640 patients for an average of six years of statin use and aspirin rates were respectively 3.5 and 3 times higher in the subgroup with calcified plaques in the EC24. This significant increase was independent of other risk factors and demonstrated coronary EC's potential to change clinical management in a sample representative of the general population. According to the results of JUPITER25 study, a large number of asymptomatic patients with normal LDL values ​​considered to have passed the indication of treatment with statins. In this study, the main criterion to indicate treatment with statins was the dosage of ultrasensitive C-reactive protein. However, recent data from the MESA study showed that the subgroup of patients with statin indication that the JUPITER criteria, but who did not have coronary calcification in the evaluation by the EC showed a low risk of cardiovascular events at follow up. Since in the JUPITER study, the absolute risk reduction considering the population as a whole was low, the MESA study authors concluded that coronary EC may have a role in selecting, among the patients who meet the criteria to receive statins, those with the greatest potential to benefit from treatment. In other words, not only C-reactive protein, but the combination of this with coronary EC, would be the best strategy to select patients with the greatest potential to benefit from statin treatment. Current recommendations In an expert consensus on the use of coronary EC on the assessment of overall cardiovascular risk, published by the ACCF / AHA in 200712, asymptomatic patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score were considered good candidates for evaluation by the EC in order to refine stratification and potentially change clinical management. In this document, the authors classified the degree of recommendation. More recently, the Guideline on the evaluation of cardiovascular risk asymptomatic patients, published by the ACCF / AHA in 20105, the quantification of coronary EC to stratify cardiovascular risk in individuals with intermediate risk by the Framingham score was considered an indication class IIa, level evidence B. Note that in this document the only interventions considered class I were stratified using global risk scores based on traditional risk factors, such as the Framingham score, for example, and clinical evaluation for the presence of CAD family history precocious. No diagnostic test, be it image or laboratory, it was rated recommendation grade class I. Just as a basis of comparison, in this document, the echocardiography, exercise testing or myocardial perfusion scintigraphy were considered as indications with degrees IIb or III recommendation. Finally, the document ACCF / SCCT / ACR / AHA / ASE / ASNC / NASCI / SCAI / SCMR on the appropriate use criteria of CT cardiac published in 20108, the use of coronary EC for stratification of global cardiovascular risk in risk patients intermediate by the Framingham score was defined as an appropriate level display 7 (A7), on a scale from 1 to 9, wherein the levels 1-3 correspond to not appropriate indications, levels 4-6 to uncertain indications and levels 7-9 the appropriate indications. In this document, the use of coronary EC was also considered an appropriate indication level 7 (A7) in patients with low risk by the Framingham score, but had early CAD family history. With regard to national recommendations, the Guidelines of the Brazilian Society of Cardiology on the use of CT cardiac published in 20067 defined as a class I indication performing coronary EC to stratify global cardiovascular risk in patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score. This same document defined as a class IIa indication the use of EC in patients with low risk but with early CAD family history. Coronary angiography examination The performance of coronary angiography only became possible with the advent of CT devices with multiple detectors in the late 90s. It became clinically used from the beginning of the next decade, after the introduction of CT scanners with 16 detector rows. Since then, technological development in this area has been staggering, and currently, there are already available equipment with 256 and up to 320 rows of detectors, which allow the acquisition of all the images necessary for coronary evaluation in a single heartbeat. Coronary angiography is based on the acquisition of a series of axial slices with submillimeter thick covering the entire length of the heart. As in the case of the EC, the images are acquired synchronized to the ECG signal. The synchronization protocol the ECG can be sequential prospective type or helical retrospective. Considering the device 64 currently available channels, while the amount of radiation dose to a retrospective acquisition modulation lies around 9.0 mSv effective dose of a prospective acquisition rotates around 3.0 mSv26 . Just as a comparison, the radiation dose of a conventional myocardial scintigraphy with technetium sestamibi or also lies around 9.0 mSv. The a myocardial thallium scintigraphy is around 18.0 mSv. It is noteworthy that, in general, there has been a great effort by the medical community to reduce increasing the amount of radiation used in cardiological examinations and that the current devices with > 256 channels already allow the performance of coronary angiography effective at lower radiation doses of 1.0 mSv. Diagnostic value There are some systematic reviews examining the diagnostic value of coronary angiography from the advent of the 64-channel devices in 200427-30. In general, these studies show that the diagnostic accuracy of the method improved as the technology evolved from 4 players and 16 channels to 64 channels of current devices. Similarly, the number of coronary segments not analyzable decreased with the progress of technological development. Based on these findings, established the concept that, while clinical application of the method it has been possible from the device with 16 channels, the current state of the art in relation to coronary angiography examinations require the use of devices with 64 or more channels, mainly due to its higher longitudinal coverage and better spatial and temporal resolution (Fig. 3). Currently there are more than 50 studies unicêntricos29 and three multicêntricos31-33 examining the accuracy of coronary angiography with 64-channel devices in the evaluation of stable symptomatic patients with suspected significant CAD. In all cases, CT angiography was compared with the current reference method, the conventional invasive coronary angiography. In general, these studies have shown fairly consistently that CT angiography has excellent accuracy to detect or exclude the presence of significant CAD. In particular, they showed that the VPN is especially high, making the test particularly useful to exclude the presence of significant obstructive lesions in this population. In the most recent systematic review, which evaluated the single-center studies conducted by the end of 2007 using 64 canais29 devices, the average sensitivity to identify the presence of significant CAD was 98% and the average specificity was 88%. The prevalence of significant CAD in these studies was 61% and the PPV and NPV were 93% and 96%, respectively. In the multicenter study CORE 6432, which evaluated 291 patients with clinical indication for invasive coronary angiography, the prevalence of significant CAD was 56%. In this study, the sensitivity and specificity of coronary angiography, in a patient's analysis, were 85% and 90%, respectively. The area under the ROC curve was 0.93. The PPV was 91% and NPV of 83%. In ACCURACY31 multicenter study, which evaluated 245 symptomatic patients, significant CAD prevalence was 25% for stenoses > 50% and only 14% for stenoses > 70%. In this study, the sensitivity was 94% or 95% depending on the threshold chosen to define the presence of significant CAD. The specificity was 82%. The VPN was 99% for both the 50% threshold as for the 70%. Since the PPV was only 48% considering the 70% threshold, and considering 64% to 50%. Finally, in a multicenter study in three Dutch university hospitals were evaluated 360 patients with coronary angiography indication invasiva33. The prevalence of significant CAD was 68%. The sensitivity and specificity of coronary angiography, for an analysis per patient were 100% and 64%, respectively. The PPV was 86% and NPV was 97%. Prognostic Value In recent years, a large number of studies have evaluated the role of MRI and CT in evaluating not only diagnóstica13,31-39, but also the evaluation prognóstica40-47 of patients with cardiovascular diseases. In the case of cardiac CT, a number of recent studies have shown that not only the evaluation of the EC, but also the assessment of coronary anatomy by coronary angiography provides important prognostic information in patients with suspected CAD significativa42,44,45,47-49. Using MDCT apparatus 16 channels, Min and cols44. They studied 1,127 patients and evaluated the relationship between mortality from all causes and results of coronary angiography. After a mean follow up of 15 months, the authors demonstrated that the severity of CAD by angiography was an important predictor of overall mortality of patients, providing additional prognostic information to traditional risk factors. In another important study, Ostrom et al45 evaluated 2,538 patients by coronary angiography using a CT apparatus for issuing elétrons45 beam. After a median of 78 months follow-up, the authors demonstrated that CT angiography provides incremental prognostic value not only to the traditional risk factors, but also the assessment of coronary EC. Later, van Werkhoven et al49 evaluated 541 patients using both coronary angiography and myocardial perfusion scintigraphy. After a 22-month follow-up evaluating the combined endpoint of cardiac death, nonfatal myocardial infarction and hospitalization for unstable angina, the authors showed that both the anatomical evaluation by CT angiography as the functional evaluation by perfusion scintigraphy provide important prognostic information and the value prognosis of the two methods are added to one another. In a recent study, Azevedo et al 48 evaluated 529 patients with suspected obstructive CAD who had been subjected to ischemia tests with inconclusive results. They showed that about 70% of these patients did not have significant obstructive lesions. In fact, about 40% were completely normal coronary arteries, with EC zero. Especially after a mean follow up of 30 months, the authors showed that both calcium scoring and coronary angiography provide important prognostic information in this population. Also recently, Hadamitzky et al 42 followed 2,223 patients with suspected CAD, for an average period of 28 months, and confirmed the findings of previous studies showing that coronary angiography not only provides important prognostic information, but also that these are incremental the clinical risk scores and the EC coronariano42. In ROC analysis, the area under the curve to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events was 0.79 for the clinical score only 0.84 for the clinical score + EC and 0.89 for the clinical score + EC + CT angiography (p < 0.001). Characterization of atherosclerotic plaque An important feature of coronary angiography, which distinguishes it from invasive coronary angiography, is its ability to provide, in addition to the vessel lumen view, also the evaluation of coronary arterial walls. Thus, not only allows to identify lesions that are causing luminal obstruction, but also to characterize atherosclerotic plaques in general, obstructive or non-obstructive. In fact, several previous studies have shown that the volume of the plates measured by angiography showed good correlation with the measurements obtained by the current gold standard, ultrasound intracoronário50. More importantly, recent reports suggest that the characterization of atherosclerotic plaques by CT angiography has the potential to help identify the most vulnerable patients presenting an acute coronary event. Motoyama et al51 evaluated 1,059 patients for the presence of two parameters measured by coronary angiography: the degree of positive remodeling and the presence of low attenuation areas on the board (suggesting lipid content) 51. The mean follow-up was 27 months. The cardiovascular event rate in 45 patients with both parameters present was 22.2%. In contrast, the rate observed in patients with only one parameter was 3.7% and in those without this parameter was 0.4%. Importantly, however, that the use of CT angiography in order to characterize atherosclerotic plaques and identify those with signs suggestive of vulnerability does not yet represent a clinically established indication and currently is only in the experimental development field.   Conclusion Currently, the use of CT for evaluation of CAD can occur in two main ways: by determining the coronary EC and by itself coronary angiography. Coronary EC provides important prognostic information that is incremental to clinical scores based on traditional risk factors and other diagnostic modalities, such as the determination of C-reactive protein, for example. In addition, the EC also has the potential to alter the behavior and aid in the clinical management of the patients. Therefore, the realization of coronary EC is indicated when the objective is the stratification of global cardiovascular risk asymptomatic patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score. Have coronary angiography provides detailed assessment of the anatomy of the coronary arteries, allowing you to see not only the lumen but also the coronary arterial walls. Compared to conventional invasive coronary angiography, CT angiography has excellent accuracy to identify and mainly exclude the presence of significant obstructive lesions. In addition, it proved to be able to provide incremental prognostic information to traditional risk factors and coronary EC. Nevertheless, although it represents very useful diagnostic tool and is indicated in the diagnostic evaluation of symptomatic patients with suspected CAD, currently, coronary angiography is not indicated when the objective is only stratification of global cardiovascular risk asymptomatic patients. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   