 SUMMARY Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of mortality worldwide. The ability to identify those asymptomatic individuals, the subgroup that is at higher risk of developing cardiovascular events in the future is a key step in any strategy aimed at reducing the cardiovascular event rates. The first step in cardiovascular risk stratification is the use of "global risk scores," among which the most frequently used is the Framingham score. However, previous studies have shown that although very useful, the clinical scores, when used alone, have limited stratification capacity of cardiovascular risk in some significant portion of the population. It is in this context that the coronary calcium score (CS) and the coronary CT angiography may play a role as complementary tools for risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. Coronary CS provides important prognostic information that is incremental to clinical scores based on traditional risk factors and other diagnostic modalities, such as the determination of C-reactive protein, for example. In addition, the CS also has got the potential to alter the behavior and aid in the clinical management of the patients. As for the coronary angiography, it provides a detailed assessment on the anatomy of the coronary arteries, allowing one to not only see the lumen but the coronary arterial walls as well. Compared to conventional invasive coronary angiography, CT angiography has excellent accuracy to identify and mainly exclude the presence of significant obstructive lesions. In addition, it showed to be able to provide incremental prognostic information to traditional risk factors and coronary CS. Keywords: Risk assessment; Coronary angiography; coronary artery disease; computed tomography x-ray.     Introduction Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of mortality worldwide. In just one year, there are 17.3 million deaths from cardiovascular disease, of which 7.3 million secondary to coronary atherosclerotic disease (CAD) and 6.2 million secondary to vascular cerebral diseases 1. Only in Brazil occurs more than 900,000 cases of acute myocardial infarct (AMI) annually, of which more than 300,000 are fatal cases. Reducing these numbers, and the consequent reduction in morbidity and mortality related to CAD, it has been one of the main objectives of public health policies in Brazil and worldwide. However, it is known that more than half of acute coronary syndromes and sudden deaths occur in individuals previously asymptomatic3. Therefore, the ability to identify those asymptomatic individuals, from the subgroup that is at higher risk of developing cardiovascular events in the future, is a key step in any strategy aimed at reducing the rates of cardiovascular events4. The first step in the cardiovascular risk stratification of asymptomatic individuals is the use of "global risk scores," among which the scores of Framingham, PROCAM (Münster Heart Study), SCORE, Reynolds, etc. Among these, the Framingham score is the most frequently used. This type of evaluation is relatively simple to perform, does not bring risks to patients, provides valuable prognostic information and has great potential to change clinical management. Therefore, the overall risk assessment scores should always be performed as a first step in cardiovascular risk stratification of asymptomatic individuals5. But a key question is the following: is the use of clinical scores enough? The fact is that previous studies have shown that these scores also have limitations. According Greenland et al. 3, 50% of patients with acute coronary syndromes have been classified as intermediate risk by the Framingham score if they had been assessed before the acute event3.  In the same study, the authors showed that about 40% of the population would also be classified in the intermediate risk group. Especially, they showed that 75% of patients with previously asymptomatic acute coronary syndromes did not meet the criteria for treatment with statins before the acute event. These data illustrate the concept that, although very useful, clinical scores, when used alone, have limited cardiovascular risk stratification capacity in a significant portion of the population. In fact, these limitations are even more significant in younger and females. It is precisely in this context that some laboratory and imaging tests, among which the calcium score (CS) and coronary CT angiography of the coronary arteries, can play an important role as complementary tools to clinical scores in the risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. The recent emergence of computer tomography (CT) with multiple detectors is causing a revolution in diagnostic and prognostic research strategies in cardiology6-11. The evaluation of the coronary anatomy and atherosclerotic burden, previously only possible through invasive tests (invasive coronary angiography, intra-coronary ultrasound, etc. ) can now be obtained non-invasive and with great accuracy through cardiac CT. In practice, the use of CT for evaluation of CAD can occur in two main ways: by determining the coronary CS and by itself coronary angiography. Although angiotomography has excellent accuracy to identify or exclude the presence of significant obstructive lesions, being able to provide valuable prognostic information6, the most robust and validated diagnostic modality to stratify global cardiovascular risk is coronary CS 5,12,13. In this review, we discuss the notions basic techniques, the main clinical applications and the available scientific evidence on the two methods: the CS and coronary angiography, mainly focusing on their roles as tools in the stratification of overall cardiovascular risk. Coronary calcium score was, initially, before the advent of CT devices with multiple detectors, the method used to evaluate the CS, it was the coronary electron-beam computed tomography. In fact, much of the accumulated scientific literature on the coronary CS is based on this technique (14). However, currently, electron beam CT is an outdated diagnostic modality and virtually unavailable in our midst. With the introduction of CT with multiple detectors in the late 90s, this became the method used to evaluate the coronary CS in clinical practice, revealing at least comparable, and in many ways superior to CT beam emission electrons for this purpose. So, in this chapter, all the technical considerations about the acquisition of CS images refer to CT with multiple detectors. The determination of the coronary EC is based on a non contrasted acquiring of a series of axial sections with 3 mm thickness covering the whole extension of the heart. Images are acquired synchronized to the electrocardiogram signal (ECG). The ECG synchronization protocol may be prospective or retrospective. The radiation dose used in the retrospective acquisition protocols is significantly higher, therefore, the prospective protocols are most commonly used. In practice, the effective radiation dose in a prospective acquisition is low, generally below 1.5 mSv and, on average, about 0.9 to 1.1 mSv. Calcification is defined as a hyper attenuating lesion with signal intensity above 130 Hounsfield units (HU) and the area > 3 adjacent pixels (at least 1 mm2). It can be calculated from the weighted sum of the densities above 130 HU (Agatston score) or by methods that determine the volume or mass of calcium. Although the scores of volume or calcium mass show better reproducibility, the large population databases describing the distribution of coronary calcification according to age, ethnicity and sex of patients, are based on the Agatston score and therefore this is the most widely used on clinical practice (Figure 1). There remains the question: How are classified and interpreted the results of coronary CS? There are two ways to classify the obtained CS values: using fixed cutoff points or cutting points adjusted for age, sex, and more recently, ethnicity of the patient. The limit values more accepted in two types of classification are described in Table 1. In the classification by fixed cutoffs, patients are categorized according to pre-established limits. In the rating points of adjusted cuts, patients are categorized according to percentiles of the distribution CS values from the general population (Fig. 2). It is important to observe, however, that both forms of classification provide valuable prognostic information and, in general, both are present in the reports issued in diagnostic centers qualified for cardiac imaging. Initially, coronary CS was used as a diagnostic tool to identify or rule out the presence of obstructive CAD in symptomatic patients. These initial studies have shown that the CS has great negative predictive value (NPV) to exclude the presence of significant CAD (96% to 100%), but the positive predictive value (PPV) was at most moderated14. In contrast, more recent studies have shown that, particularly in younger patients or in populations with high prevalence of significant CAD, in addition to PPV inadequate positive, the CS also features insufficient NPV to exclude the presence of significant obstructive disease. In fact, Gottlieb et al.15 have shown that, in a population with a 56% prevalence of significant CAD, even 19% of the patients with CS= 0 had at least one obstructive lesion > 50% on invasive coronary angiography15. 
 Considering only moderate PPV and the conflicting data regarding the NPV, the current consensus is that, in general, coronary CS should not be used as a tool for the diagnosis of significant obstructive CAD in symptomatic patients. As we shall see, the real value of coronary CS in clinical practice lies in its ability to provide valuable prognostic information and serve as an important tool for risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. Prognostic value: An important concept to understand why the coronary EC has the potential to play an important role in cardiovascular risk stratification is that coronary calcification marks the presence of atherosclerotic plaques in the coronary arteries. In the coronary arterial bed, calcification occurs almost exclusively in the context of atherosclerotic disease. In a certain individual, the amount of calcification in the coronary arteries shows good correlation with total coronary atherosclerotic burden. However, not all atherosclerotic plaque is calcified. In fact, previous reports showed that the calcified portion represents only about 20% of the total volume of the plate; i.e., coronary calcification represent only the "tip of the iceberg" of the CAD; with the portion not calcified accounting for about 80% of the total atherosclerotic burden. It is worth noting that the presence or absence of calcium has not been significantly associated with the propensity to rupture of a certain plaque, and that the presence of calcification is a signal of neither "stability" nor "instability" of any plaque.
 Several longitudinal population studies, that included many patients, have shown that the coronary CS has a significant association with the occurrence of major cardiovascular events (death from all causes, cardiac death and nonfatal) in the medium and long term monitoring. The greater the amount of calcium in the coronary arteries, the greater the chance the patient has a cardiovascular event in the future. Even more important, a series of previous studies have shown that the capacity of CS to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events is additional to the risk stratification by use of the Framingham score and other methods, such as C-reactive protein measurement. 

 Indeed, a classic study16 showed that patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score and CS > 300 had a cardiovascular event rate of 2.8%/year (roughly equivalent to a rate of 28% in 10 years), that put them at high risk (> 20% in 10 years). A recent consensus published by the ACCF/AHA on the use of coronary CS in assessing cardiovascular global risk12 examined the combined data from six major studies including 27,622 asymptomatic patients and evaluated the main predictors of a total of 395 cardiovascular events. Among the 11,815 patients with CS = 0, the event rate was very low, only 0.4% in the 3 to 5 years thereafter. Compared to patients with CS = 0, those with CS between 100 and 400 had a relative risk (RR) of 4.3 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 3.5 to 5.2, p < 0.0001), those with CS between 400 and 1000 showed an RR of 7.2 (95% CI 5.2 to 9.9, p < 0.0001) and those with CS > 1000 showed an RR of 10.8 (95% CI 4.2 to 27.7; p < 0.0001). Since the publication of that consensus, other prospective studies have confirmed these findings and showed that the association between CS and prognosis is similar regardless of gender or ethnicity of patient 14,17. Even more important, all these studies also confirmed that the assessment of the EC is able to provide incremental prognostic information to the assessment of traditional risk factors only. On the ROC analysis, the area under the curve to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events was significantly greater with CS than with the Framingham or PROCAM risk scores. In the MESA's study, the "C" statistics, considering only the traditional risk factors, was of 0.79 to predict major cardiovascular events, and of 0.83 when the CE information was associated with risk factors (p = 0.006) 17. Previous studies have also shown that the coronary EC provides additional prognostic information for assessment of C-reactive protein. In four studies based on multivariate models, the EC remained an independent predictor of major cardiovascular events, while the C-reactive protein is no longer a significant predictor in the multi varied analysis 8-21. When compared to the thickness measure of the intimate/medium of the carotid artery (IMT), the EC coronary proved to be a better predictor of subsequent events; the hazard ratio (HR) of IMT was 1.7 (95% CI 1.1 to 2.7; p = 0.07), while the RH of EC was 8.2 (95% CI 4 5 to 15.1; p = 0.001) 22. Changing clinical management potencial In addition to its role as a risk stratification tool, another important aspect of EC relates to its potential to change and help with the clinical management of patients suspected of having CAD.  In an observational study, Kalia et al.23 showed that the rate of use of hypolipidemic medications in patients with dyslipidemia increased from 44% to over 90% in those who presented severe calcification in the assessment via EC23. Other preventive behavioral measures, such as regular exercise and adopting healthier diets also showed improvement in the subgroup with higher EC values. Above all, in a prospective study that followed 1,640 patients for an average of six years of statin use and aspirin rates were respectively 3.5 and 3 times higher in the subgroup with calcified plaques in the EC24. This significant increase was independent of other risk factors and demonstrated the coronary EC's potential to change clinical management in a representative sample of the general population. According to the results of the JUPITER study25, a large number of asymptomatic patients with LDL levels considered normal started to have directions for statin treatment.  In that study, the major criteria to indicate statin treatment was the ultra-sensitive C-reactive protein test.
 However, recent data from the MESA study showed that the subgroup of patients with statin indication according to JUPITER criteria, but who did not have coronary calcification in the evaluation by the EC showed a low risk of cardiovascular events at follow up. According to the JUPITER study, the absolute risk reduction considering the population as a whole was low, the MESA study authors concluded that coronary CE may have a role in selecting, among the patients who meet the criteria to receive statins, those with the greatest potential to benefit from the treatment. In other words, not only C-reactive protein, but the combination of this with coronary EC, would be the best strategy to select patients with the greatest potential to benefit from statin treatment. Current recommendations In an expert consensus on the use of coronary EC on the assessment of overall cardiovascular risk, published by the ACCF/AHA in 200712, asymptomatic patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score were considered good candidates for evaluation by the EC in order to refine stratification and potentially change clinical management. In this document, the authors didn't classify the level of recommendation. More recently, the Guideline on the evaluation of cardiovascular risk asymptomatic patients, published by the ACCF/AHA in 20105, the quantification of coronary EC to stratify cardiovascular risk in individuals with intermediate risk by the Framingham score was considered an indication class IIa, level evidence B. It's important to stress that in this document the only interventions considered as class I were the stratifications using global risk scores based on traditional risk factors, such as the Framingham score, for example, and clinical evaluation for the presence of CAD family history precocious. No diagnostic exam, either based image or laboratorial results, was rated with a class I recommendation grade. Just as a basis of comparison, in this document, echocardiography, exercise testing or myocardial perfusion scintigraphy were considered indications with the levels of recommendation IIb or III. Finally, on ACCF/SCCT/ACR/AHA/ASE/ASNC/ NASCI/SCAI/SCMR's document about the appropriate use of criteria of the CT cardiac published in 20108, the use of coronary EC for stratification of global cardiovascular in patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score was defined as an appropriate level display 7 (A7), on a scale from 1 to 9, where in the levels 1-3 correspond to non appropriate indications, levels 4-6 to uncertain indications and levels 7-9 the appropriate indications. In this document, the use of coronary EC was also considered an appropriate indication level 7 (A7) in patients with low risk by the Framingham score, but who had a family history of early CAD. Regarding national recommendations, the Guidelines of the Brazilian Society of Cardiology on the use cardiac CT published in 20067 defined as a class I indication doing a coronary EC to stratify global cardiovascular risk in patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score. This same document defined as a IIa class indication the use of EC in patients with low risk but with early CAD family history. Coronary angiography examination The performance of coronary angiography only became possible with the advent of CT devices with multiple detectors in the late 90s. It started to be clinically used from the beginning of the next decade, after the introduction of with 16 detector rows scanners. Since then, technological development in this area has been staggering, and currently, there are already equipment available with 256 and up to 320 rows of detectors, which allow the acquisition of all the necessary images for coronary evaluation in a single heartbeat. Coronary angiography is based on the acquisition of a series of axial slices with submillimeter thick covering the entire length of the heart. As in the case of the EC, the images are acquired synchronized to the ECG signal. The synchronization protocol the ECG can be sequential prospective type or helical retrospective. Considering the currently available 64-channel devices, regarding the amount of radiation in a retrospective acquisition with dose modulation lies around 9.0 mSv, the effective dose of a prospective acquisition lies around 3.0 mSv 26. Just as a comparison, the radiation dose of a conventional myocardial scintigraphy with technetium or sestamibi also lies around 9.0 mSv. The myocardial scintigraphy with thallium is around 18.0 mSv. It is noteworthy that, in general, there has been a great effort by the medical community to reduce increasing the amount of radiation used in cardiological examinations and that the current devices with > 256 channels already allow the performance of coronary angiography effective at lower radiation doses of 1.0 mSv. Diagnostic value 
There are some systematic reviews assessing the diagnostic value of EC since the advent of 64-row devices in 200427-30.
 In general, these studies show that the diagnostic accuracy of the method improved as the technology evolved from 4 players and 16 channels to 64 channels of current devices. Similarly, the number of coronary segments not analyzable decreased with the progress of technological development. Based on these findings, it was established on the concept that, while the clinical application of the method had been possible from the device with 16 channels, the current state of the art in relation to coronary angiography examinations require the use of devices with 64 or more channels, mainly due to its higher longitudinal coverage and better spatial and temporal resolution (Fig. 3). Currently there are more than 50 single-center studies29 and three multicenter studies31-33 assessing the accuracy of Angiotomography with 64-row devices for the assessment of stable symptomatic patients suspected of having significant CAD. 

 In all cases, the CT angiography was compared to the current reference method, the conventional invasive coronary angiography. In general, these studies have consistently shown that CT angiography has excellent accuracy to detect or eliminate the presence of significant CAD. In particular, they showed that the VPN is especially high, making the test particularly useful to exclude the presence of significant obstructive lesions in this population. In the most recent systematic review, which evaluated the single-center studies conducted until the end of 2007 using devices with 64 channels29, the average sensitivity to identify the presence of significant CAD was 98% and the average specificity was of 88%. The remain average of significant CAD in these studies was of 61% and the PPV and NPV were 93% and 96%, respectively. In the multicenter study CORE 6432, which evaluated 291 patients with clinical indication for invasive coronary angiography, the prevalence of significant CAD was 56%. In this study, the sensitivity and specificity of coronary angiography were 85% and 90%, respectively, in a patient's analysis. The area under the ROC curve was of 0.93. The PPV was 91% and NPV 83%. In ACCURACY31 multicenter study, which evaluated 245 symptomatic patients, significant CAD prevalence was 25% for stenoses > 50% and only 14% for stenoses > 70%. In this study, the sensitivity was 94% or 95% depending on the threshold chosen to define the presence of significant CAD. Specificity was 82%.  The NPV was 99% for both the 50% and 70% thresholds.  The PPV was only of 48% for the 70% threshold, and 64% for the 50% threshold.
 Finally, in a multicenter study in three Dutch university hospitals were evaluated 360 patients with coronary angiography indication invasiva33. The prevalence of significant CAD was 68%. The sensitivity and specificity of coronary angiography, for an analysis per patient were 100% and 64%, respectively. The PPV was of 86% and the NPV was of 97%. Prognostic value In recent years, many studies have evaluated the role of magnetic resonance (MRI) and CT not only in the diagnostic evaluation 13,31-39, but also in the prognostic evaluation 40-47 of patients with cardiovascular diseases. In the case of cardiac CT, a number of recent studies have shown that not only the evaluation of the EC, but also the assessment of coronary anatomy by coronary angiography provides important prognostic information in patients with suspected CAD significativa42,44,45,47-49. Using a TCMD apparatus of 16 channels, Min e cols (44) 1,127 patients were studied and the relationship between mortality from all causes and coronary angiography results was evaluated. After an average follow up of 15 months, the authors demonstrated that the severity of CAD by angiography was an important predictor of the overall mortality of patients, providing additional prognostic information to traditional risk factors. In another important study, Ostrom et al45 evaluated 2,538 patients by coronary angiography using a CT apparatus for issuing elétrons45 beam.  After a mean 78-month follow-up, the authors have shown that angiography has an incremental prognostic value to not only traditional risk factors, but also to the EC. Later, van Werkhoven et al49 evaluated 541 patients using both coronary angiography and myocardial perfusion scintigraphy. After a 22-month average follow-up 
evaluating the combined endpoint of cardiac death, nonfatal myocardial stroke and hospitalization for unstable angina, the authors showed that both anatomical evaluation by CT angiography and functional evaluation by perfusion scintigraphy provide important prognostic information and the prognostic value of the two methods is additional to one another. In a recent study, Azevedo et al 48 evaluated 529 patients with suspected obstructive CAD who had been subjected to ischemia tests with inconclusive results. They showed that about 70% of these patients did not have significant obstructive injuries. In fact, about 40% showed completely normal coronary arteries, with zero CE. Especially after an average follow up of 30 months, the authors showed that both calcium scoring and coronary CT angiography provide important prognostic information in this population. Also recently, Hadamitzky and cols.42 followed 2,223 patients with suspected CAD, for an average period of 28 months, and confirmed the findings of previous studies showing that the coronary angiography not only provides important prognostic information, but also that these are incremental to the scores of clinical risk and coronariano EC42. In ROC analysis, the area under the curve to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events was of 0.79 for the clinical score only 0.84 for the clinical score + EC and 0.89 for the clinical score + EC + CT angiography (p < 0.001). Characterization of atherosclerotic plaque An important characteristic of angiography, which distinguishes it from invasive coronary angiography, is its ability to provide the assessment of coronary arterial walls in addition to the visualization of coronary arterial walls.  Thus, it not only allows us to identify the injuries that are causing luminal obstruction, but also to characterize atherosclerosis plaques, in general, as obstructive or non-obstructive. In fact, several previous studies have shown that the volume of the plates measured by angiography showed a good correlation with the measurements obtained by the current gold standard, the ultrasound intracoronário50. More importantly, recent reports suggest that the characterization of atherosclerotic plaques by CT angiography has the potential to help identify the most vulnerable patients presenting an acute coronary event. Motoyama et al.51 have assessed 1,059 patients regarding the presence of two parameters measured by coronary angiography: the grade of positive remodeling and the presence of low-attenuation areas in the plaque, suggesting lipid content51.  The mean follow-up was of 27 months. The cardiovascular event rate on the 45 patients with both parameters present was 22.2%. In contrast, the rate observed on patients with only one parameter was 3.7% and, on those without this parameter, it was 0.4%. It is important to note, however, that the use of CT angiography, in order to characterize the atherosclerotic plaques and identify those with signs suggestive of vulnerability, does not yet represent a clinically established indication and currently is only in the experimental development field. Conclusion Currently, the use of CT for the evaluation of CAD can occur in two main ways: by determining the coronary EC and by the coronary angiography itself. The coronary EC provides important prognostic informations, which are incremental to clinical scores based on traditional risk factors and other diagnostic modalities, such as the determination of the C-reactive protein, for example. In addition, the EC also has the potential to alter the behavior and aid on the clinical management of the patients. Therefore, the execution of coronary EC is indicated when the objective is the stratification of the global cardiovascular risk of asymptomatic patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score. As for coronary angiography, it provides a detailed assessment of the anatomy of the coronary arteries, allowing to see not only the lumen, but the coronary arterial walls as well. Compared to the conventional invasive coronary angiography, the angiotomography has an excellent accuracy on identifying and, most importantly, excluding the presence of significant obstructive lesions. In addition, it proved to be able to provide incremental prognostic information to traditional risk factors and to the coronary EC. Nevertheless, although it represents a very useful diagnostic tool and is indicated in the diagnostic evaluation of symptomatic patients with suspected CAD, currently, the coronary angiotomography is not indicated, when the objective is only the stratification of global cardiovascular risk for asymptomatic patients. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare that there is no relevant conflict of interest. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Academic Association This study is not associated with any post-graduation program.   