 ABSTRACT THE cardiovascular disease represents the main cause of mortality in the world. The ability to identify, among asymptomatic individuals, the subgroup that presents the highest risk of developing cardiovascular events in the future represents a fundamental step in any strategy aimed at decreasing rates of cardiovascular events. The first step in the stratification of cardiovascular risk is the use of the "scores of global risk", among which the most frequently used is the Framingham score. However, previous studies have shown that although very useful, clinical scores, when used alone, have limited capacity for stratifying cardiovascular risk in a significant portion of the population. It is in this context that the calcium score (EC) coronary artery and the angiotomografia of the coronary arteries can play an important role as complementary tools in the risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. The EC coronary artery provides important information prognostic that are incremental to clinical scores based on traditional risk factors and the other forms of diagnostic, such as the dosage of C-reactive protein, for example. In addition, the EC also has the potential to change the conduct, and assist in the clinical management of patients. Already the angiotomografia coronary provides detailed assessment of the anatomy of the coronary arteries, allowing you to view not only the lumen but also the arterial walls coronary. Compared to the coronary angiography is invasive conventional, the angiotomografia features excellent accuracy to identify and, mainly, to exclude the presence of obstructive lesions significant. In addition, it has been demonstrated capable of providing information prognostic incremental to traditional risk factors, and to the EC coronary artery. Keywords: Measurement of risk; Coronary angiography; disease of the coronary arteries; computed tomography x-ray Introduction cardiovascular disease represents the main cause of mortality in the world. In just one year, occurring for 17.3 million deaths caused by cardiovascular diseases, of which 7.3 million secondary to atherosclerotic coronary artery disease (cad) and 6.2 million secondary to vascular diseases cerebrais1. Only in Brazil there are more than 900,000 cases of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) per year, with more than 300,000 cases fatais2. The reduction of these numbers, and the consequent decrease of the morbidity and mortality related to CAD has been one of the main objectives of public health policies in Brazil and in the world. However, it is known that more than half of the acute coronary syndromes and sudden deaths occur in individuals previously assintomáticos3. Therefore, the ability to identify, among asymptomatic individuals, the subgroup that presents the highest risk of developing cardiovascular events in the future represents a fundamental step in any strategy directed to the reduction of the rates of events cardiovasculares4. The first step in the stratification of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic individuals is the use of the "scores of global risk", among which the scores of the Framingham, PROCAM (Münster Heart Study), SCORE, Reynolds, etc. Of these, the Framingham score is the most often used. This type of evaluation is relatively simple to be carried out, does not bring risks to the patients, provides information prognostic valuable and has great potential to change the clinical approach. Therefore, the scores of global risk assessment should always be carried out as the first step in stratification of the cardiovascular risk of individuals assintomáticos5. But a fundamental question is the following: the use of clinical scores is enough? The fact is that previous studies have shown that these scores also have limitations. According to Greenland and cols.3, 50% of patients with acute coronary syndromes would have been classified as intermediate risk by the Framingham score had been assessed prior to the event agudo3. In the same study, the authors demonstrated that about 40% of the general population would also be classified in the group of intermediate risk. Above all, they demonstrated that 75% of patients with acute coronary syndromes previously asymptomatic subjects did not meet criteria for treatment with statins prior to the acute event. These data illustrate the concept that, although very useful, clinical scores, when used alone, have limited capacity for stratifying cardiovascular risk in a significant portion of the population. In fact, these limitations are even more significant in younger individuals and in those of the female sex. It is exactly in this context that some laboratory tests and imaging, among which the calcium score (EC) coronary artery and the angiotomografia of the coronary arteries, may play an important role as complementary tools to clinical scores in risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. The advent of recent computed tomography (CT) with multiple detectors has been causing a real revolution in the strategies of research, diagnostic and prognostic in cardiologia6-11. The evaluation of the anatomy and load to atherosclerotic coronary, before only possible through invasive exams (coronary angiography is invasive, ultrasound intracoronariano, etc. ), can now be obtained non-invasively and with excellent accuracy by means of cardiac CT. In practice, the use of CT for evaluation of the DAC can take two main forms: through the determination of the EC the coronary artery and through the angiotomografia coronary itself. Although the angiotomografia present excellent accuracy to identify or exclude the presence of obstructive lesions, significant, and be able to provide valuable information prognósticas6, the modality of the diagnostic more robust and validated to stratify the cardiovascular risk, the global is the EC coronariano5,12,13. In this review, we will discuss the notions of basic techniques, the clinical applications of the major and the available scientific evidence on the two methods: the EC and the angiotomografia coronary, focusing mainly on their roles as tools in the stratification of cardiovascular risk, global. Coronary artery calcium score The exam Initially, before the advent of the devices of CT with multiple detectors, the method used for the evaluation of the EC coronary artery was emission computed tomography electron-beam (Electron-beam computed tomography). In fact, a good part of the accumulated scientific literature on EC coronary artery is based on that técnica14. However, currently, the TC by emission of an electron beam represents a modality diagnostic outdated and virtually unavailable in our midst. With the introduction of CT with multiple detectors at the end of the 90's, this started to be the method used for the evaluation of the EC coronary artery in clinical practice, revealing at least comparable and, in many respects, superior to CT for the issuance of electron beam for this purpose. Therefore, in this chapter, all the technical considerations about the acquisition of the images of the EC refer to the CT with multiple detectors. The determination of the MC coronary artery is based on an acquisition is contrasted with a series of axial sections of 3 mm thickness covering the whole extension of the heart. The images are acquired synchronously to the signal of the electrocardiogram (ECG). The synchronization protocol the ECG, can be prospective or retrospective. The dose of radiation used in the protocols of acquisition retrospective is significantly higher, therefore, the protocols prospective are the most used. In practice, the effective dose of radiation in a purchase, prospective studies is low, in general below 1.5 mSv, and, on average, about 0.9 to 1.1 mSv. The calcification is defined as an injury hiperatenuante with signal intensity above 130 Hounsfield units (HU) and area > 3 adjacent pixels (at least 1 mm2). Can be calculated from the weighted sum of the densities above 130 HU (score of Agatston) or by methods that determine the volume or mass of calcium. Although the scores of the volume or mass of calcium present better reproducibility, the great seats of population-based data that describe the distribution of calcification in the coronary care according to the age, ethnicity and sex of the patients, are based on the score of Agatston and, therefore, this is the most used in clinical practice (Figure 1). A question remains: How are classified and interpreted the results of the EC coronary artery? There are two ways of classifying the values of EC obtained: using cut-off points or fixed cut-off points adjusted for age, sex, and, more recently, the ethnicity of the patient. The limit values that are more accepted in the two types of classification are described in table 1. Classification cutting points fixed, the patients are categorized according to pre-established limits. Already in the classification by points of cuts adjusted, the patients are categorized according to the percentiles of the distribution of EC values of the general population (Fig. 2). It is important to note, however, that both forms of classification provide information prognostic valuable and that, in a general way, both are present in the reports issued in the centres of diagnostics, trained in the examination of image heart. Initially, the EC coronary artery was used as a diagnostic tool with the goal to identify or exclude the presence of DAC obstructive in symptomatic patients. These initial studies demonstrated that the EC has great negative predictive value (npv) to exclude the presence of DAC-significant (96% to 100%), but that the positive predictive value (PPV) was, at most, moderado14. In contrast, more recent studies have shown that, particularly in younger patients or in populations with a high prevalence of DAC-significant, in addition to the VPP positive to be inappropriate, the EC also presents VPN insufficient to exclude the presence of disease obstructive significant. In fact, Gottlieb and cols.15 have shown that, in a population with a 56% prevalence of DAC-significant, even 19% of the patients with EC = 0 had at least one obstructing lesion > 50% on coronary angiography invasiva15. Considering the VPP only moderate, and the conflicting data in relation to the VPN, the current concept is that, in a general way, the EC coronary artery should not be used as a tool for the diagnosis of cad obstructive significant in symptomatic patients. As we will see below, the real value of the EC coronary artery in clinical practice consists in its ability to provide valuable information on prognostic and serve as an important tool in the risk stratification of asymptomatic patients. Prognostic value An important concept to understand because the EC coronary artery has the potential to play a relevant role in the stratification of cardiovascular risk is that the calcification of the coronary represents a marker of the presence of by atherosclerotic plaques of the coronary arteries. In the bed blood, coronary artery, calcification occurs almost exclusively in the context of atherosclerotic disease. In a given individual, the amount of calcification present in the coronary arteries presents good correlation with the load atherosclerotic coronary total. However, not all atherosclerotic plaque is calcified. In fact, previous reports have shown that the portion of the calcified corresponds to only about 20% of the total volume of the plate; that is, the calcification coronary would represent only the "tip of the iceberg" of the DAC; with the portion not calcified accounting for about 80% of the load for atherosclerotic total. It is important to emphasize that the presence or absence of calcium is not associated significantly with the degree of propensity that a particular card has to break through, and that the presence of calcification is not a sign of "stability" or "instability" of a board any. Several population studies longitudinal, which included large number of patients, demonstrated that the EC coronary artery shows significant association with the occurrence of cardiovascular events increased death from all causes, cardiac death and AMI non-fatal) in monitoring medium and long term. The greater the amount of calcium in the coronary heart, the greater the chance the patient has an event cardiovascular in the future. Even more important, a series of previous studies demonstrated that the ability of ce to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events is additional to the risk stratification by the Framingham score and the other methods have also been used to stratify the risk, as the dosage of C-reactive protein, for example. In fact, a study clássico16 showed that patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score, and EC > 300 had an event rate of cardiovascular of 2.8%/year (approximately equivalent to a rate of 28% in 10 years), which would put them in the high risk group (> 20% in 10 years). A recent consensus published by the ACCF/AHA regarding the use of the EC coronary artery in the cardiovascular risk assessment global12 examined the combined data from six large studies that included 27.622 asymptomatic patients and to evaluate the main predictors of a total of 395 cardiovascular events. Among the 11.815 patients with EC = 0, the event rate was very low, only 0.4% within the next 3 to 5 years subsequent. Compared with the patients with EC = 0, those with EC between 100 and 400 showed a relative risk (RR) of 4.3 (confidence interval 95% [95% CI], 3.5 to 5.2; p < 0.0001), those with EC between 400 and 1000 showed a RR of 7.2 (95% CI 5.2 to 9.9; p < 0.0001), and those with EC > 1000 showed a RR of 10.8 (95% CI 4.2 to with 27.7; p < 0.0001). Since the publication of this consensus, other prospective studies have confirmed these findings and demonstrated that the association between EC and the prognosis is similar irrespective of the sex or ethnicity of the paciente14,17. Even more important, all of these studies have also confirmed that the assessment of the EC is able to provide information prognostic incremental the assessment of traditional risk factors only. In ROC analysis, the area under the curve to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events was significantly higher with EC coronary artery than with the scores of the Framingham or PROCAM. In the study TABLE, statistics "C", considering only the traditional risk factors, was of 0.79 for predicting cardiovascular events the largest, and of 0.83 when the information of the EC was associated with the risk factors (p = 0.006)17. Previous studies have also shown that the EC coronary artery provides prognostic additional to the evaluation of C-reactive protein. In four studies based on multivariate models, the EC remained as an independent predictor of cardiovascular events the largest, while the C-reactive protein is no longer a significant predictor in the analyses multivariadas18-21. When compared to the measurement of the thickness of the intima/media of the carotid artery (IMT), the EC coronary artery was found to be a better predictor of subsequent events; the hazard ratio (HR) of the IMT was 1.7 (95% CI 1.1 to 2.7; p = 0.07), while the HR of the EC was 8.2 (95% CI 4.5 to 15.1 per; p = 0.001)22. Potential to change the clinical approach in Addition to its role as a tool for risk stratification, another important aspect related to the EC the coronary artery with respect to its potential value as an instrument able to change the clinical approach and to assist in the management of patients with suspected CAD. In an observational study, Kalia and cols.23 have demonstrated that the rate of medication use lipid-lowering in patients with dyslipidemia increased from 44% to over 90% in those who presented with severe calcification in the evaluation by the EC23. Other behavioural measures preventive, such as regular physical exercise, and adoption of diets more healthy, also showed improvement in the subgroup with the greatest values of EC. Especially, in a prospective study that followed 1.640 patients for an average of six years, the rates of use of statins and aspirin were, respectively, 3.5 and 3 times higher in the subgroup with signs of calcification in the EC24. This significant increase was independent of other risk factors and demonstrated the potential of the EC coronary blood change the clinical approach of a sample of individuals representative of the general population. According to the results of the study JUPITER25, a large number of asymptomatic patients with values of LDL considered normal went on to have indication of treatment with statins. In this study, the main criterion to indicate the treatment with statins is the dosage of C-reactive protein ultra-sensitive. However, recent data from the MESA study showed that the subgroup of patients with an indication for statins according to the criteria of JUPITER, but that did not have calcification in the coronary assessment by the EC, presented a low risk of cardiovascular events in the follow-up of evolution. Given that, in the study of JUPITER, the reduction in absolute risk, considering the population as a whole was low, the authors of the DESK study concluded that the EC coronary artery can have a relevant role in the selection, among the patients who meet the criteria to receive statins, those with the greatest potential for benefit from treatment. In other words, not only the C-reactive protein, but the combination of this with the EC, coronary artery, it would be the best strategy to select the patients with the greatest potential for benefit from treatment with statins. Current recommendations On a consensus of experts on the use of the EC coronary artery in the assessment of cardiovascular risk, global, published by the ACCF/AHA in 200712, asymptomatic patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score were considered good candidates for evaluation by the EC with the objective to refine the stratification and potentially change the clinical approach. In this document, the authors classified the degree of recommendation. More recently, in the Guideline on cardiovascular risk assessment of asymptomatic patients, published by the ACCF/AHA in 20105, the quantification of the EC coronary artery to stratify cardiovascular risk in individuals with intermediate risk by the Framingham score was considered an indication class IIa, level of evidence B. it Is important to highlight that in this document the only interventions considered as class I have been layering using scores of overall risk based on the factors of traditional risks, such as the Framingham score, for example, and the clinical evaluation for the presence of a family history of the DAC early. No diagnostic test, be it imaging or laboratory, it has been classified with a level of recommendation class I. Only as a basis of comparison, in this document, the completion of the echocardiogram, exercise stress test, or scintigraphy of myocardial perfusion were considered as indications with degree of recommendation IIb or III. Finally, in the document of the ACCF/SCCT/ACR/AHA/ASE/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SCMR on the criteria for appropriate use of cardiac CT published in 20108, the use of the EC coronary artery for the stratification of cardiovascular risk overall in patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score was defined as an indication of the appropriate level 7 (A7), on a scale that ranges from 1 to 9, with levels 1-3 correspond to the indications not to appropriate, levels 4-6 the indications are uncertain, and levels 7-9 the appropriate directions. In this document, the use of the EC coronary artery was also considered to be an indication of the appropriate level 7 (A7) in patients with low-risk by the Framingham score, but who had a family history of the DAC early. With regard to the national recommendations, the Guideline of the Brazilian Society of Cardiology on the use of cardiac CT published in 20067 defined as an indication class I the realization of the EC coronary artery to stratify the cardiovascular risk overall in patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score. This same document set as one indication class IIa the use of EC in patients with low-risk but with a family history of DAC early. Angiotomografia Coronary the exam The realization of the angiotomografia coronary only became possible with the advent of devices of CT with multiple detectors at the end of the decade of 90. Started to be clinically used from the beginning of the following decade, after the introduction of the ct scanner with 16 rows of detectors. Since then, the technological development in this area has been dizzying, and, currently, there are already available devices with 256 and even 320 rows of detectors, that allow the acquisition of all the images needed for the evaluation of coronary in a single heartbeat. The angiotomografia coronary is based on the acquisition of a series of axial sections with a thickness submilimétrica covering the whole extension of the heart. As in the case of the EC, the images are acquired synchronously to the signal of the ECG. The synchronization protocol the ECG may be of the type prospective sequential or retrospective spiral. Considering the apparatus of the 64 channels currently available, while the amount of radiation of an acquisition retrospective with modulation of the dose is located in and around 9.0 mSv, the effective dose of an acquisition prospective revolves around 3.0 mSv26. Only as a basis of comparison, the radiation dose of a myocardial scintigraphy with conventional technetium or sestamibi is also located in and around 9.0 mSv. A myocardial scintigraphy with thallium revolves around 18.0 mSv. It is worth noting that, in general, there has been a large effort on the part of the medical community in the sense of increasingly reduce the amount of radiation used in heart tests, and that the current devices with > 256 channels already allow the realization of the angiotomografia coronary with effective doses of radiation less than 1.0 mSv. Diagnostic value there are Already some systematic reviews examining the diagnostic value of the angiotomografia coronary from the advent of the apparatus of the 64 channels in 200427-30. In general, these studies demonstrate that the diagnostic accuracy of the method improved as the technology has evolved from the apparatus 4 and 16 channels for the current devices of 64 channels. In the same way, the number of segments of coronary not analyzable decreased with the progress of technological development. Based on these findings, they established the concept that, although the clinical application of the method has been possible from devices with 16 channels, state of the art current in relation to the examination of angiotomografia coronary requires the use of devices with 64 or more channels, mainly due to its greater coverage of the longitudinal and the best spatial resolution and temporal (Fig. 3). Currently there are over 50 studies unicêntricos29 and three multicêntricos31-33 by examining the accuracy of the angiotomografia coronary devices 64 channels in the evaluation of symptomatic patients stable with suspected DAC-significant. In all cases, the angiotomografia was compared with the method of reference current, the coronary angiography is invasive conventional. In general, these studies have shown fairly consistently that the angiotomografia it has an excellent accuracy to detect or exclude the presence of DAC-significant. In particular, they have shown that the VPN is especially high, making the examination is particularly useful to exclude the presence of obstructive lesions significant in this population. In the systematic review the most recent, which evaluated the studies unicêntricos held until the end of 2007 by using the apparatus 64 canais29, the average sensitivity to identify the presence of DAC-significant was 98% and the specificity was average was 88%. The average prevalence of DAC-significant in these studies was 61% and the VPP AND VPN were 93% and 96%, respectively. In the multicentre study CORE-6432, which evaluated 291 patients with clinical indication of coronary angiography is invasive, the prevalence of DAC-significant was 56%. In this study, the sensitivity and specificity of the angiotomografia coronary, in an analysis per patient, were 85% and 90%, respectively. The area under the ROC curve was 0.93. The PPV was 91% and the VPN was 83%. In the multicenter study ACCURACY31, which evaluated 245 symptomatic patients, the prevalence DAC-significant was 25% for stenosis > 50% and only 14% for stenosis > 70%. In this study, the sensitivity was 94% or 95%, depending on the threshold chosen to define the presence of DAC-significant. The specificity was 82%. The VPN was 99%, both for the threshold of 50% to 70%. Already the VPP was only 48%, considering a threshold of 70%, and 64% considering the 50%. Finally, in a multicenter study conducted at three university hospitals, the Dutch, were evaluated 360 patients with indication of angiography invasiva33. The prevalence of DAC-significant was 68%. The sensitivity and specificity of the angiotomografia coronary, in an analysis per patient, were 100% and 64%, respectively. The PPV was 86% and the VPN was 97%. Prognostic value In recent years, a large number of studies have evaluated the role of magnetic resonance imaging and CT scan not only to assess diagnóstica13,31-39, but also in the evaluation prognóstica40-47 of patients with cardiovascular diseases. In the case of tomography, heart, a series of recent studies has demonstrated that not only the assessment of the EC, but also the evaluation of coronary anatomy by angiotomografia coronary provides information prognostic important in patients with suspected DAC significativa42,44,45,47-49. Device using MDCT 16-channel, Min, and cols44. studied 1.127 patients and assessed the relationship between all-cause mortality and the results of the angiotomografia coronary. After a mean follow up of 15 months, the authors demonstrated that the severity of cad by angiotomografia was a factor primary predictor of total mortality of patients, providing information prognostic additional to traditional risk factors. In another important study, Ostrom and colleagues.45 evaluated 2.538 patients through the angiotomografia coronary using a unit of TC for the issuance of beam elétrons45. After a median follow up of 78 months, the authors demonstrated that the angiotomografia displays prognostic value incremental not only to traditional risk factors, but also to the evaluation of the EC coronary artery. Later, van Werkhoven, and cols.49 assessed 541 patients using both the angiotomografia coronary as the scintigraphy of myocardial perfusion. After a median follow up of 22 months evaluating the outcomes of combined cardiac death, myocardial non-fatal and hospitalization for unstable angina, the authors demonstrated that both the evaluation of anatomical by angiotomografia as the functional evaluation by scintigraphy perfusion provide information prognostic important, and that the prognostic value of the two methods is additional to one another. In a recent study, Azevedo and colleagues.48 evaluated 529 patients with suspected DAC obstructive that had been subjected to tests of ischemia with inconclusive results. They demonstrated that about 70% of these patients did not have obstructive lesions significant. In fact, about 40% had coronary arteries completely normal, with EC of zero. Especially, after a median follow up of 30 months, the authors demonstrated that both the calcium score as the angiotomografia coronary provide important information prognostic in this population. Also recently, Hadamitzky and cols.42 accompanied 2.223 patients with suspected CHD, for an average period of 28 months, and confirmed the findings of previous studies, demonstrating that the angiotomografia coronary not only provides information prognostic important, but also that these are incremental to the scores for risk clinical and EC coronariano42. In ROC analysis, the area under the curve to predict the occurrence of cardiovascular events was of 0.79 for the clinical score only, of 0.84 for the clinical score + EC and 0.89 for the clinical score + EC + angiotomografia (p < 0.001). Characterization of the atherosclerotic plaque An important feature of the angiotomografia coronary, which distinguishes it from the coronary angiography is invasive, is its ability to provide, in addition to the visualization of the light of the vase, also the assessment of the arterial walls coronary. In this way, allows not only to identify the lesions which are causing obstruction to luminal, but also to characterize the plaques atherosclerotic of a general form, obstructive or non-obstructive. In fact, several previous studies have shown that the volume of the plates measured by the angiotomografia presented good correlation with the measures obtained by the gold standard, the current, the ultrasound intracoronário50. Even more important, recent reports suggest that the characterization of the plaques atherosclerotic by angiotomografia has the potential to assist in the identification of patients more vulnerable to present an event acute coronary. Motoyama and colleagues.51 evaluated 1.059 patients as to the presence of two parameters measured by the angiotomografia coronary: the degree of remodeling positive and the presence of areas of low attenuation on the board (suggesting content lipid)51. The average time of follow-up was 27 months. The rate of cardiovascular events in 45 patients with the two parameters present was 22.2%. In contrast, the observed rate in patients with only one parameter was 3.7% and in those without any parameter present was 0.4%. It is important to note, however, that the use of the angiotomografia with the aim to characterize the plaques atherosclerotic and identify those with signs suggestive of vulnerability still does not represent an indication clinically established and, currently, is only in the field of experimental development. Conclusion Currently, the use of CT for evaluation of the DAC can take two main forms: through the determination of the EC the coronary artery and through the angiotomografia coronary itself. The EC coronary artery provides important information prognostic that are incremental to clinical scores based on traditional risk factors and the other forms of diagnostic, such as the dosage of C-reactive protein, for example. In addition, the EC also has the potential to change the conduct, and assist in the clinical management of patients. Therefore, the implementation of the EC coronary artery is indicated when the objective is the stratification of cardiovascular risk, global asymptomatic patients with intermediate risk by the Framingham score. Already the angiotomografia coronary provides detailed assessment of the anatomy of the coronary arteries, allowing you to view not only the lumen but also the arterial walls coronary. Compared to the coronary angiography is invasive conventional, the angiotomografia features excellent accuracy to identify and, mainly, to exclude the presence of obstructive lesions significant. In addition, it has been demonstrated capable of providing information prognostic incremental to traditional risk factors, and to the EC coronary artery. Nevertheless, even though it represents a diagnostic tool very useful and is indicated in the diagnostic evaluation of symptomatic patients with suspected CHD, currently, the angiotomografia coronary is not yet indicated when the goal is only the stratification of cardiovascular risk, global asymptomatic patients. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 