INTRODUCTION Liver transplantation is a procedure that saves the lives of patients with chronic liver disease or end-stage acute liver failure when no other medical and surgical treatments available. Since the first liver transplant performed by Thomas Starzl in 1963, there are significant improvements in all aspects of retrieval, selection, and preserving organ implantation techniques. The one-year survival for adults and children of transplanted cadaver donor is over 85%; in five and ten years it is above 70% and 60%, respectively. However, the biliary tract complications continue to be a common source of morbidity and mortality. Some authors call the "Achilles heel" of the transplant hepático2. Studies on the long-term results after liver transplantation indicate that 5% to 30% of recipients develop biliary complications after transplantation. biliary fistula and stenosis are the most common complications of the bile ducts, but sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, hemobilia, and biliary obstruction of the cystic duct by mucocele or calculations are also observed. Biliary fistula rate or stenoses at the anastomotic site are reported in 15% to 60% of recipients. These high rates of bile post-transplant complications can point to inherently sensitive nature of the biliary epithelium ischemic damage in comparison to hepatocytes and vascular endothelium. Surgical treatment has been the traditional approach to biliary complications of liver transplantation. With advances in therapeutic and diagnostic endoscopy, conservative treatment of biliary complications has become one of the most widely utilizadas2. The objective of this study was to retrospectively evaluate the results of endoscopic treatment of biliary complications in patients undergoing liver transplantation.   METHODS We evaluated 15 patients undergoing liver transplantation (cadaveric donors) referred to the Endoscopy Service of the Hospital Cesar Calls and a private clinic endoscopy, from December 2004 to July 2011, to perform endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) on suspicion of post-transplant biliary complications. It was based on elevated liver enzymes or cholestatic, presence of jaundice, itching, pain, coliperitoneum after removal of the bile drain, fever or cholangitis. CPRE and the appropriate therapy were conducted individually, as the medical information at the time of the examination. Complications after examination were classified as mild (bacteremia, occlusion or migration of the prosthesis) and severe (acute pancreatitis, bleeding, perforation) is also evaluated retrospectively. The results of endoscopic therapy was considered successful when there was clinical improvement, laboratory and / or endoscopic appearance. treatment failure was considered when there was no improvement of the above mentioned parameters and / or the patients required another type of therapy (percutaneous or surgical drainage).   Results were analyzed 15 post-transplant patients and 10 (66.67%) men and five (33.33%) women. The average age of patients was 49.5 (27- 67) years. The most frequent cause of liver disease patients who took transplantation was hepatitis C (5 / 33.3%), followed by the association of hepatitis C with hepatocellular carcinoma (4 / 26.7%), hepatitis B (2/13, 33%), hepatitis B and Delta (2 / 13.33%), alcoholic cirrhosis and hepatitis B (1 / 6.7%) and alcoholic cirrhosis alone (1 / 6.7%). Most receivers had advanced disease, and were classified as Child B and all received cadaver donor organ. The cold ischemia time of the graft averaged 5.7 h. The graft warm ischemia time averaged 41.2 min (Table 1).     biliary stenosis was diagnosed in 13 (86.7%) patients, most papilla dysfunction associated with choledocholithiasis in a patient (6.67%) and also biliary fistula in a patient (6.67%) (Table 2). The stenoses were dilated catheter or hydrostatic balloon, followed by placement of prostheses as endoscopist indication at the time of examination. The average time between the transplant and the holding of the first ERCP was 12.6 months (1- 69) in patients with stenosis. Two patients underwent ERCP later, one five years after transplant, and another with more than two years. During the study period there were 33 ERCP in 13 patients with stenosis, averaging 2.53 (1-5) and three tests per patient ERCP in all the other cases (Table 3).     The success of endoscopic therapy in these cases was of 53.84 (7/13), and 38.46% (5/13) are still during treatment and one patient died during treatment for recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma. In the case of patients with biliary fistula was successful endoscopic treatment with plastic prosthesis, as well as in with CDL associated with dysfunction of hepatopancreaticaduodenal ampoule being treated with papilotomy and removal calculations. The average length of stay with the biliary stent was 8.73 months (0-16). Of the 13 with anastomotic stricture, only one patient developed recurrence of stenosis being treated endoscopically with balloon dilator, without prosthesis. Median after resolution of the stricture segment time was 28 months. (Table 3). The post-liver transplant follow-up ranged from four to 86 months, with a median of 27 months. There was one death due to recurrence post-transplant hepatocellular carcinoma, a case of post-ERCP bacteremia and some cases of obstruction of prostheses, prevalent in patients who have spent more time with biliary stent.   DISCUSSION The setting of biliary complications after liver transplantation has changed rapidly in the past two decades. Conventional treatment of these conditions in the past was exclusively surgical. However endoscopic therapy plays an important role in the treatment of post-anastomotic stenosis liver transplantation. Currently, the preferred endoscopic approach is aggressive dilation of the stenosis and insertion of multiple plastic stents, particularly anastomotic strictures. surgical and percutaneous modalities are now reserved for patients with endoscopic treatment failure and those with multiple intrahepatic or anastomotic strictures in inaccessible Roux Y. or bioabsorbable coated metal prostheses can provide superior results and deserve further investigation. Endoscopic therapy area will continue to evolve and provide opportunities to new innovative techniques for liver transplantation to develop stenosis of the biliary tract. Currently, ERCP is indicated for the definition and treatment of post-liver transplant biliary complications, with success rates satisfactory avoiding large number of reoperations. Biliary complications may occur in 6% to 39.5% of patients undergoing liver transplantation, more frequent after living donor liver transplantation. The development of complications can be determined by a number of factors such as underlying disease prior bile operation, anastomotic type disproportion between the size of the biliary donor and recipient inadequate extent of bile graft via anatomical complexity gall right track, which may result in anastomotic over a biliary branch. Other important factors that may contribute to the development of bile complications are the use of bile drains infection (cytomegalovirus, CMV) and ischemia5. In this series, there was a predominance of males, with a mean age of 49.4 years, similar to that found in the literature. The most frequent cause of liver transplantation was hepatitis C, also according to literature. The most frequent diagnosis was the biliary stricture, with a higher rate to that found in the literature According Rerknimitr et al4, analyzing the results of endoscopic therapy of 43 patients undergoing liver tranplante cadaver donor, evolving with stenosis of the biliary anastomosis was average 8.3 months (0.5-60) transplanting until the completion of ERCP, lower than the value found in this series. In a similar case series of 25 patients, Zoepf et al.7 found the mean time of transplantation by ERCP five months (1-33) and Pasha et al.3, in a similar case series of 25 patients found the range Average time of two months (0.2 to 24) 2. The average ERCP per patient was 3.8 (1-8) in the series of Rerknimitr Holt et al.4 et al.1 found success rate of endoscopic treatment of 69%, slightly higher than that found in this study, using as a mode the therapeutic balloon dilator associated with the stent, with mean duration of endoscopic treatment of 11.3 months (7-14), also higher than that found in this study. For Pasha et al.3, the segment of median time without the prosthesis was 15 months, slightly higher than this work. As for recurrence of anastomotic stricture, Zoepf et al 7 reported rate of 31%, higher than this series. The rate of complications in a recent review published in the literature, ranging from 5% to 24% 1.   CONCLUSIONS post-liver transplant biliary complications are relatively common, with a prevalence of stenoses. The endoscopic treatment was effective in most patients in this series.   