INTRODUCTION Liver transplant is a procedure that saves the lives of patients with terminal stage chronic liver disease or acute liver failure when no other medical and surgical treatments are available. Since the first liver transplant was performed by Thomas Starzl in 1963, there have been major improvements in all aspects involving organ retrieval, selection, preservation and implantation techniques. 1-year survival rates for adults and children with liver transplants from deceased donors are above 85%; 5- and 10-year survival rates are above 70% and 60%, respectively. However, biliary tract complications continue to be a common source of morbidity and mortality. Some authors call them the "Achilles heel" of liver transplants. (2) Studies on long-term results after liver transplantation indicate that 5% to 30% of the recipients develop biliary complications after the procedure. Biliary fistula and stenosis are the most common bile duct complications, but Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, hemobilia, and biliary obstruction of the cystic duct due to mucocele or stones are also observed. Biliary fistulae or stenoses at the anastomotic site are reported in 15% to 60% of the recipients. Such high rates of post-transplant biliary complications can point to an inherently sensitive nature of the biliary epithelium to ischemic damage, compared to hepatocytes and the vascular endothelium Surgical treatment has been the traditional approach to biliary complications following liver transplantation procedures. With advances in therapeutic and diagnostic endoscopy, conservative treatment of biliary complications has become one of the most common methods (2). The aim of this study was to retrospectively assess the results of endoscopic treatment for biliary complications on patients that have undergone liver transplantation.   METHODS We evaluated 15 patients that have undergone liver transplantation (deceased donors), forwarded to the Endoscopy Service of Cesar Calls Hospital and to a private endoscopy clinic, from December 2004 to July 2011, to undergo endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for suspected post-transplant biliary complications. The suspicion was based on elevated liver or cholestatic enzymes, presence of jaundice, itching, pain, coliperitoneum after the removal of the bile drain, fever or cholangitis. The ERPC and the appropriate therapy were conducted individually, according to the physician's information at the time of the examination. Complications after examination were classified as mild (bacteremia, occlusion or migration of the stent) and severe (acute pancreatitis, bleeding, perforation), and have also been  retrospectively assessed. The results of endoscopic treatment have been considered successful when clinical, laboratorial and/or endoscopic improvements were observed. Treatment failure was defined as the lack of improvement under the aforementioned parameters and/or when patients required other treatment methods (percutaneous or surgical drainage).   RESULTS Fifteen post-transplant patients were analyzed, comprising ten men (66.67%) and five women (33.33%). The patients' average age was 49.5 (27- 67). The most common cause of liver disease and subsequent transplantation was hepatitis C (5/33.3%), followed by the combination of hepatitis C and hepatocellular carcinoma (4/26.7%), hepatitis B (2/13, 33%), hepatitis B and Delta (2/13.33%), alcoholic cirrhosis and hepatitis B (1/6.7%) and alcoholic cirrhosis alone (1/ 6.7%). Most recipients had advanced disease and were classified as Child B; all of them received an organ from a deceased donor. The graft's cold ischemia time averaged 5.7 h. The graft's warm ischemia time averaged 41.2 min (Figure 1).     Biliary stenosis was diagnosed in 13 (86.7%) patients; major papilla dysfunction associated with choledocholithiasis was diagnosed in one patient (6.67%); and biliary fistula was also diagnosed in one patient (6.67%) (Figure 2). Stenoses were dilated with a catheter or hydrostatic balloon, followed by the placement of prostheses as indicated by the endoscopist at the time of examination. The average time between the transplant and the first ERCP was 12,6 months (1- 69) for patients with stenosis. Two patients underwent the ERCP later - one of them five years after the transplant and the other more than two years after the procedure. During this study, 33 ERCPs were performed on 13 patients with stenosis, averaging 2,53 (1-5) examinations per patient, and three ERCPs in the remaining cases (Figure 3).     The success rate of endoscopic therapy in these cases was 53.84 (7/13); 38.46% (5/13) are still under treatment and one patient died during treatment due to hepatocellular carcinoma relapse. Endoscopic treatment with plastic stents was successful in the case of the patient with biliary fistula, as well as in the case of the patient with choledocholithiasis associated with hepatopancreaticaduodenal ampulla dysfunction, which was treated with papilotomy and the removal of kidney stones. The average permanence time with the biliary stent was 8.73 months (0-16). Out of 13 patients with anastomotic stenosis, only one patient had stenosis relapse; the patient was treated endoscopically with a balloon dilator, without a stent. The follow-up median time after the correction of the stenosis was 28 months 
 (Figure 3). The post-transplant follow-up ranged from 4 to 86 months, with a median of 27 months. There was one death due to post-transplant hepatocellular carcinoma relapse, a case of post-ERCP bacteremia, and some cases of stent obstruction, prevalent in patients who have spent more time with a biliary stent.   DISCUSSION The problem of post-transplant biliary complications has changed rapidly in the past two decades. In the past, conventional treatment of such issues was exclusively surgical. However, endoscopic therapy plays an important role in the treatment of post-transplant anastomotic stenosis. Currently, the preferred endoscopic approach is the aggressive dilation of the stenosis and the insertion of multiple plastic stents, particularly in the case of anastomotic stenoses. Surgical and percutaneous methods are now reserved for patients with endoscopic treatment failure, and for patients with multiple intrahepatic stenoses or inaccesible Roux-en-Y  anastomoses. Coated metal or bioabsorbable stents may provide better results and deserve further research. Endoscopic therapy will continue to evolve and provide opportunities for innovative liver transplantation techniques that address biliary tract stenosis. Currently, ERCP is indicated for the definition and treatment of post transplant biliary complications, with satisfactory success rates, thereby avoiding a large number of reoperations. Biliary complications may occur in 6% to 39.5% of patients who have undergone liver transplantation, and are more frequent after living donor transplants. Complications may be caused by a number of factors, such as: the underlying disease, previous biliary procedures, anastomotic type, disproportion between the dimensions of the donor's and the recipient's biliary duct, inadequate extension of the graft biliary duct and the anatomical complexity of the right billiary duct, which may cause anastomosis in more than a biliary branch. Other important factors that may contribute to the development of biliary complications are: the use of bile drains, infections (cytomegalovirus, CMV) and ischemia (5). There was a predominance of males in this series, with a average age of 49.4 years, similar to the data reported in the literature. The most frequent cause of liver transplantation was hepatitis C, also in line with data reported in the literature. The most frequent diagnosis was biliary stenosis, with higher rates than what is reported in the literature. According to Rerknimitr et al (4), who analyzed the results of endoscopic therapy on 43 patients who have undergone liver transplants from deceased donors and had biliary anastomosis stricture complications, there was an average of 8.3 months (0.5-60) between the transplant and the ERCP, lower than the figures found in this series. In a similar series of 25 patients, Zoepf et al. (7) reported an average interval of 5 months (1-33) between the transplant and the ERCP, while Pasha et al. (3), in a similar series of 25 patients, reported an average interval of 2 months (0.2-24) (2). The average number of ERCPs per patient was 3.8 (1-8) in the series discussed by Rerknimitr et al. (4) Holt et al. (1) reported a success rate of 69% for endoscopic treatment, slightly higher than the success rate found in this study, using the balloon dilator combined with the stent graft, with an average endoscopic treatment duration of 11.3 months (7-14), also higher than in this study. For Pasha et al. (3), the average follow-up time without the stent was 15 months, slightly higher than in this work. As for the recurrence of anastomotic stenosis, Zoepf et al (7) reported a 31% rate, higher than in this series. The complications rate in a recent literature review ranges between 5% and 24% (1).   CONCLUSIONS Biliary complications after liver transplants are relatively common, with a predominance of stenoses. Endoscopic treatment was effective in most patients in this series.   