 INTRODUCTION liver transplantation is a procedure that saves lives of patients with chronic liver disease stage terminal or acute liver failure when no other clinical treatments and surgical available. Since the first liver transplant performed by Thomas Starzl in 1963, there has been significant progress in all aspects of recovery, selection, preservation, and implantation techniques of the body. The survival rate at one year for adults and children transplanted from a donor cadaver is greater than 85%; in five to ten years it is above 70% and 60%, respectively. However, the complications of the biliary tract continue to be a common source of morbidity and mortality. Some authors call it "Achilles ' heel" of the transplant hepático2. Studies on long-term outcomes after liver transplantation indicate that from 5% to 30% of the recipients develop complications bile after transplantation. Biliary fistula and stenosis are the most common complications of the bile ducts, but the dysfunction of the sphincter of Oddi, hemobilia, and biliary obstruction from cystic duct for mucocele or calculations are also observed. The rate of biliary fistula or stenosis at the site of the anastomosis are reported in 15% to 60% of the receptors. These high rates of complications post-transplant biliary, can point to nature, inherently sensitive of biliary epithelial damage ischemic, in comparison with hepatocytes and vascular endothelium. The surgical treatment has been the traditional approach in complications bile of liver transplant. With advances in therapeutic endoscopy and diagnostic, conservative treatment of the complications of the bile has become one of the modalities more utilizadas2. The objective of this work was to retrospectively evaluate the results of endoscopic treatment of complications of bile in patients who underwent liver transplantation. The METHODS Were evaluated in 15 patients undergoing liver transplantation (donor body) referred to the Service of Endoscopy of the Hospital Cesar Calls and a private clinic of endoscopy, in the period from December 2004 to July 2011, for conducting endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for suspected complication biliary post-transplantation. It was based on the elevation of liver enzymes or colestáticas, presence of jaundice, pruritus, pain, coleperitônio, after removal of the drain the bile, fever or cholangitis. ERCP and appropriate therapy were carried out individually, according to the indication of the physician at the time of the examination. The complications observed after the examination were classified into mild (bacteremia, occlusion or migration of the prosthesis), and severe (acute pancreatitis, bleeding, perforation) being evaluated also retrospectively. The result of the therapeutic endoscopy was considered successful when there was clinical improvement, laboratory and/or appearance endoscopic. Was considered treatment failure when there was no improvement of the above-mentioned parameters and/or the patients required another therapeutic modality (percutaneous drainage or surgery). RESULTS were Analyzed 15 patients post-transplant and 10 (66,67%) men and five (33.33 percent) were women. The average age of the patients was 49.5 (27 - 67) years. The most frequent cause of liver disease that led the patient to transplantation was hepatitis C (5/33,3%), followed by the association of hepatitis C with hepatocarcinoma (4/ 26,7%), hepatitis B (2/13,33%), hepatitis B and hepatitis Delta (2/13,33%), hepatitis B, and alcoholic cirrhosis (1/6,7%), and only alcoholic cirrhosis (1/6,7%). The majority of the recipients had advanced disease, and were classified as Child B, and all of them received donor organ cadaver. The time of cold ischemia of the graft was on average 5.7 h. The warm ischemia time of the graft was an average of 41.2 min (Table 1). Stenosis of bile was diagnosed in 13 (86,7%) patients, dysfunction of the papilla most associated with the coledocolitíase in one patient (6,67%) and biliary fistula in a patient (6,67%) (Table 2). The strictures were dilated with a catheter or balloon, hydrostatic, followed by the placement of implants according to the indication of the endoscopista at the time of the examination. The mean time between the transplantation and the completion of the first ERCP was 12.6 months (1 - 69) in patients with stenosis. Two patients underwent ERCP at a later time, one of them five years after transplantation and another with more than two years. In the period of the study were carried out 33 ERCP in 13 patients with stenosis, with a mean of 2.53 (1-5) examinations per patient and three ERCP in all other cases (Table 3). The success of therapeutic endoscopic in these cases was 53,84 (7/13), 38,46% (5/13) are still in the commencement of treatment and one patient died during treatment for recurrence of hepatocarcinoma. In the case of a patient with biliary leak, there was success in the endoscopic treatment with the prosthesis plastic, as well as with coledocolitíase associated with dysfunction of the ampoule hepatopancreaticaduodenal, being treated with papilotomia and withdrawal calculations. The average length of stay with the prosthesis bile was 8,73 months (0-16). Of the 13 with stenosis of the anastomosis, only one patient evolved with recurrence of the stenosis, and is being treated endoscopically with balloon dilator, without the need for the prosthesis. The median time segment post-resolution of the stenosis was 28 months. (Table 3). The follow-up post-liver transplantation ranged from four to 86 months, with a median of 27 months. There was one death for recurrence of hepatocarcinoma post-transplant, a case of bacteremia post-ERCP, and some cases of obstruction of the prostheses, prevalent in the patients that have spent more time with the prosthesis biliary. DISCUSSION THE scenario of the complications bile after liver transplant has changed rapidly in the last two decades. The conventional treatment of these conditions in the past was exclusively surgical. However the therapeutic endoscopy plays important role in the treatment of stenosis anastomotic post-liver transplant. Currently, the approach to endoscopic is preferred for the thermal expansion of the aggressive of the stricture and insertion of multiple stents plastics, particularly in strictures anastomotic site. Surgical modalities and percutaneous are now reserved for patients with failure of endoscopic treatment, and for those with multiple strictures of intra-hepatic or with anastomoses Roux-en-Y inaccessible. Metal prostheses are coated or bioabsorvíveis can provide superior results and deserve further investigation. The area of therapeutic endoscopy will continue to evolve and offer opportunities for new, innovative techniques in liver transplantation who develop stenosis via bile. Currently, ERCP is indicated for definition and treatment of complications bile after liver transplantation, with success rates satisfactory in avoiding the great number of reoperations. Complications of bile can occur in 6% to 39,5% of the patients submitted to liver transplantation, being more frequent after liver transplantation between parties. The development of complications can be determined by a number of factors, such as underlying disease, operation biliary the prior, type of anastomosis, disproportion between the size of the via biliary giver and receiver, extension inadequate via the biliary of the graft and complexity to the anatomical via the bile to the right which can result in the leakage of more than a branch of bile. Other important factors that can contribute to the development of the complication of bile are: the use of drains bile, infection (cytomegalovirus, CMV) and isquemia5. In the present study, there was a predominance of males, with a mean age 49.4 years, similar to that found in the literature consulted. The most frequent cause of liver transplantation was hepatitis C, also in agreement with the literature. The most frequent diagnosis found was stenosis of bile, with an index superior to that found in the literature According to Rerknimitr et al4, analyzing the results of endoscopic therapy of 43 patients submitted to tranplante liver donor, cadaver, evolving with stenosis of the anastomotic biliary there was an average of 8.3 months(0,5-60) from the transplant until the completion of the ERCP, lower than the value found in this case series. On a case-by-case similar to that of 25 patients, Zoepf et al.7 found the average interval from time of transplantation until the ERCP five months (1-33) and Pasha et al.3, in case-by-case similar to that of 25 patients found the average interval of time of two months (0,2-24)2. The average of ERCP per patient was 3.8 to (1-8) in the series of Rerknimitr et al.4 Holt et al.1 found the rate of success of therapeutic endoscopic of 69%, a little higher than found in this study, using as a therapeutic modality the balloon dilator associated with using an endoprosthesis with a mean duration of therapy endoscopic of 11,3 months (7-14), also higher than found in this study. To Pasha et al.3, the median segment without the prosthesis was of 15 months, a little higher than the this work. As to the recurrence of stenosis of the anastomosis, Zoepf et al7 reported a rate of 31%, higher than in this series. The rate of complications in a recent review published in the literature, ranged from 5% to 24%1. CONCLUSIONS complications from bile after liver transplantation are relatively common, with predominance of stenosis. Endoscopic treatment was effective in the majority of patients in this series. 