SUMMARY Coronary angiography has recently emerged as an accurate diagnostic tool in the evaluation of coronary artery disease, providing data diagnoses and prognoses that correlate directly with the data provided by coronary angiography. With technological developments, enabling improved temporal resolution, spatial, better coverage of cardiac volume with significant reduction in radiation dose, added to the need for more effective risk stratification protocols for patients with chest pain in the emergency room, your application has to be tested in the setting of acute chest pain, since about two-thirds of invasive coronary angiograms show no significant obstructive coronary artery disease. In daily practice, without the use of more efficient technologies, such as CT angiography of coronary arteries, it remains a challenge to the doctor's emergency room safe and efficient stratification of patients with acute chest pain. Recently, several studies including three randomized, showed favorable results with the use of this technology in the emergency department for patients with low to intermediate likelihood of coronary artery disease. In this review, we present the data of the use of coronary angiography for risk stratification of patients with chest pain in the emergency room, its diagnostic value, prognosis and cost-effectiveness and a critical analysis of recent multicenter studies published. Keywords: coronary artery disease; CT / use; Chest pain; hospital emergency service Introduction In this systematic review we discuss the current evidence of CT angiography of the coronary arteries and the recent impact of the publication, almost simultaneously, three large controlled trials, multicenter, randomized, using this new technology in clinical practice. Are reviewed clinical and epidemiological importance of coronary artery disease, CT angiography technology coronary arteries and its recent evolution, the initial studies single-center, meta-analyzes and ultimately randomized studies, a critical analysis of these and the latest data on cost -efetividade and clinical impact. Clinical and epidemiological importance of coronary artery disease and acute coronary syndrome In 2008, the overall rate of deaths attributed to cardiovascular disease (CVD) was 244.8 per 100,000 inhabitants, corresponding to 811,940 deaths out of a total of 2,471,984, or once every three deaths in the United States. Based on these data, about 2,200 Americans die every day in the United States due to cardiac causes, or one death every 39 seconds. The Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is responsible for almost 50% of these deaths (405,309), with 195,000 cases of acute myocardial infarction, resulting in a coronary event every 25 seconds and approximately one death per minute, despite spending CVD US $ 297.7 billion, corresponding to 16% of total health spending, higher than any other group of diseases1. As in the United States, Brazil cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of death from chronic noncommunicable diseases, while financial expenses are the largest among the disease groups. Despite the decline of 26% observed in death rates attributed to cardiovascular causes between 1996 and 2004, Brazil has one of the highest death rates from CVD in South America (286 per 100,000 inhabitants), only exceeded by the rates presented by Guyana and Suriname. Similarly, this group of disease has the highest rates of hospital admissions. In 2007, 12.7% of hospital admissions not related to pregnancy and 27.4% of admissions of patients aged over 60 years were due to cardiovascular diseases2. In view of these worrying figures, the diagnostic evaluation of patients with acute chest pain is a major challenge in the emergency rooms, both from the standpoint of diagnosis and optimization and correct targeting of resources. As Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) represents almost one-fifth of the causes of chest pain in the emergency rooms, and have high morbidity and mortality, the initial approach to these patients is always done in order to confirm or exclude the diagnosis, in order to optimize the time to the beginning of treatment or proceed to discharge safely. The current protocols, however, are not effective in the triage group of patients with acute chest pain of intermediate and low risk, where the myocardial necrosis markers are normal and electrocardiographic changes are nonexistent or nonspecific. These protocols, until recently, did not include diagnostic tools to provide information on the presence and severity of CAD. As a result, confirmation or exclusion of ACS, particularly in patients with unstable angina, needed overuse of diagnostic tests, resulting in hospital admissions too or possibly in delayed initiation of treatment. Thus, the recent introduction of coronary angiography by computed tomography starts a new scenario in the emergency department for evaluation of patients with acute chest pain. Coronary angiography technology CT: The CT angiography of coronary With technological advances over the past decades, since the introduction of the tomograph electron beam capable of measuring coronary artery calcification to the present tomograph with Multiple detectors columns ( MDCT), the ability to perform cardiac imaging won significant increase in diagnostic accuracy. Multiple studies have shown that coronary stenoses can be identified non-invasively by computed tomography is high quality images are played back. The quality of cardiac imaging by CT is directly related to the evolution of CT scanners. The increase in the speed of rotation of the ray tubes x for speeds less than 500 ms, and the increase in the number of detectors 4 to 64 or more, and the reduction in thickness of the slice acquired for submillimeter levels brought a significant increase in accuracy diagnosis of coronary artery disease by coronary angiography tomography computadorizada3, allowing the diagnostic visualization of cardiac structures and, more specifically, the anatomical evaluation of the wall and the lumen of the coronary arteries with high sensitivity and specificity, as well as the extent of the disease. Nevertheless, the concern for the safety of the patient before the radiation exposure has always guided the evolution of this technology and, through the latest generation of CT scanners, they obtain optimal image quality with significantly lower radiation doses than the initial, if reducing exposure by more than 50%. Thus, coronary angiography to (TCCor) has become useful diagnostic tool in the setting of acute chest pain in the emergency department, especially in cases of suspected acute coronary syndrome without ST elevation, providing medical information of high quality and reproducibility and a new perspective in the diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic decision. The controlled studies in CT angiography of coronary angiography Accuracy of coronary in CAD - Meta-analysis and Controlled Clinical Studies Since the introduction of CT scanners with 64 columns detectors in 2003, more than 50 studies have been published comparing the diagnostic performance of TCCor with the standard reference, invasive coronary angiography (CATE). These studies have revealed great diagnostic performance for patient with high sensitivity (S) and specificity (E), ranging from 91% to 99% and 74% to 96%, respectivamente4-8. However, the method validation occurred with the publication of three studies multicêntricos9-11 designed to access and refine the diagnostic performance of TCCor in different populations (Table 1). One of these studies was ACCURACY (Assessment by Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography of Individuals Undergoing Invasive Coronary Angiography) 9, which involved patients without CHD known with stable angina or had altered functional test. The diagnostic performance of TCCor to detect stenosis > 70% when compared to the CATE was S = 94% E = 83% Positive Predictive Value (PPV) 48% and Negative Predictive Value (NPV) 99%, with the area under the curve ROC of 0.95, revealing the high diagnostic accuracy both to confirm and to exclude significant coronary stenosis. In another multicenter study, CORE64 (Coronary Evaluation on 64) 10 were included 291 patients with and without CAD known as Agatston calcium score < 600, resulting in a higher prevalence of CAD, 56% for reduction of threshold luminal > 50%. In this study, which was the first and only one to quantitatively measure the coronary stenosis by angiography, S, E, PPV and NPV per patient were 85%, 90%, 91% and 83%, respectively. lower the findings of VPN and most VPP are due to higher prevalence of CAD in this study. The accuracy of the method, defined as the area under the ROC curve was 0.91 for CAD confirmed by coronary angiography. Additionally, TCCor was similar to CATE to predict the need for coronary revascularization following 30 days. The European prospective multicenter study evaluated 360 patients without CAD known as acute chest pain and angina estável11. As expected, the prevalence of CAD was high (68%), and diagnostic performance TCCor revealed S, E, PPV and NPV of 99%, 64%, 86% and 97%, respectively. Together, the three multi-center studies have shown high sensitivity and NPV in individuals without known CAD, identifying the ability of TCCor to detect and exclude significant coronary stenosis. initials of coronary angiography studies in the SCA - single-center studies and meta-analyzes with method validation, revealing its high diagnostic performance, especially in its high negative predictive value, coupled with the absence of an effective protocol and risk stratification insurance in SCA without ST-segment elevation in risk groups low to intermediate studies investigated the inclusion of TCCor the diagnostic investigation of pictures of acute chest pain in emergency departments. Meijboom et al 12 evaluated 104 patients presenting with ACS without ST elevation, classified as high (n = 71) and low risk (n = 33) according to clinical, electrocardiographic and levels of myocardial necrosis markers. Using the CATE as a reference standard, the diagnostic performance of TCCor in detecting significant coronary lesions (stenosis > 50%) showed S = 100% (88/88, 95% CI 95-100), E = 75% (12 / 16, 95% CI 47-92), PPV = 96% (88/92, 95% CI 89-99) and VPN = 100% (12/12, 95% CI 70-100), revealing the high sensitivity of TCCor in detecting significant coronary stenosis as far as to exclude the presence of significant CAD in this group of patients with high pretest probability of coronary artery disease. Similarly, Hoffmann et al 13, in a cohort of 103 patients with acute chest pain in the emergency room, with ECG and normal cardiac enzymes also found similar results to the above. Of the 103 hospitalized patients, 14 were diagnosed with ACS (acute myocardial infarction without ST elevation and unstable angina = 5 = 9), and TCCor reached the diagnosis of significant stenosis in five patients diagnosed with acute myocardial infarction without ST elevation. Three other patients underwent CATE by provocative tests account of positive ischemia and, as the CATE, the TCCor proved accurate in excluding coronary atherosclerosis. In the remaining patients, the TCCor was able to exclude disease, and this subgroup during the follow-up period were not observed major cardiac events. Moreover, the presence of CAD on coronary angiography brought incremental value of SCA prediction using traditional risk factors. The study by Rubinshtein et al14, a total of 58 patients, the diagnosis of ACS was confirmed in 20 patients with TCCor revealing significant coronary lesions (stenosis > 50%) in 23 subjects, resulting in S = 100% E = 92%, PPV = 87% and NPV = 100%. Of the other 35 patients, 15 showed no DAC and the remaining 20 showed no obstructive coronary artery disease. During follow-up of 15 months, no death or myocardial infarction among the 35 patients in whom TCCor showed no significant stenosis. Thus, the sensitivity of TCCor to predict major cardiovascular events (death, myocardial infarction or revascularization) during the hospitalization and follow-up of 15 months was 92%, E = 76%, PPV = 52% and NPV = 97% . In another study involving 586 patients with suspected ACS classified as low risk by the TIMI score (Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction), CT angiography of the coronary arteries was immediately performed in 285 patients, and after 9horas other 283 patients. In this scenario, the TCCor was able to exclude significant coronary artery disease in 476 (84%) subjects, being released safely and agility of the emergency department. None of these patients had death or nonfatal heart attack within 30 days of the exam performance15. Researchers at the National University of Seul16 to randomize 268 patients with acute chest pain to perform TCCor in MDCT with 64 detectors have reduced the need for hospitalization in the group classified as intermediate risk for CAD, as well as reduced length of hospital stay. Following 30 days, no patient group undergoing TCCor suffered higher cardiac event while a patient in the conventional strategy was the victim of acute myocardial infarction. Goldstein et al 17 came to the same conclusions in a randomized study. And to evaluate the diagnostic efficacy, this study evaluated the safety and efficiency of the method. The TCCor was able to delete and readily identify coronary disease as a cause of chest pain in 75% of cases, including 67 patients with normal coronary arteries and 8 patients with significant coronary artery disease. With regard to security, compared to the standard protocol (scintigraphy Myocardial Perfusion [CPM]), the TCCor was as safe as scintigraphy. Moreover, the time for diagnosis (3.4 H x 15 h) and cost (US $ 1,586 x $ 1872) were significantly lower in the group using the TCCor (p < 0.001), revealing also that CT angiography of coronary heart can confirm or rule out CAD as the cause of acute chest pain safely emergency room, effective and efficient. Because many institutional protocols use the Exercise Stress Test (TE) as stratifying risk in patients with acute chest pain, evaluated the prognostic value of TCCor compared to TE. From a total of 471 patients, 424 (90%) completed the follow-up of 2.6 years. A total of 44 major cardiac events occurred in 30 patients (4 deaths from cardiac causes, nonfatal MI 6, 23 revascularizations and 11 episodes of unstable angina). The presence of obstructive CAD was associated with a significantly higher rate of events compared to the absence of obstructive CAD (6.8% vs. 1.2%, p < 0.001). The results of the TE revealed an annual event rate of 1.6%, when normal 1.9%, when positive (TE ischemic response), and 4.6% when inconclusive results. A statistically significant increase in global risk analysis was detected after adding the findings of TCCor (Qui2 13.7 versus 37.7, p < 0.001, respectively). The resulting increase in reclassification index (NRI net reclassification index) of the patient was also evaluated with NRI 54% TE (160 patients reclassified as more severe and 249 as lighter) and NRI 80% with the results of TCCor ( 132 reclassified as a more serious and 277 as lighter). Thus, the TCCor findings were presented as a strong predictor of future cardiac events, showing incremental value on the clinical findings and test ergométrico18. The ROMICAT19 study showed that in a population with low to intermediate risk of ACS with acute chest pain, 50% showed no coronary lesions to TCCor. In this study, diagnostic performance TCCor showed a S = 100%, E = 54% PPV = 17% NPV = 100% for the assessment of the presence of any coronary atherosclerotic plaque. When analyzed the presence of obstructive CAD ( > 50% luminal narrowing), the sensitivity was 77%, E = 87%, PPV = 35% and NPV = 98%. Both the presence of CAD, as the presence of significant stenosis were able to predict the SCA TCCor regardless of risk factors or the TIMI score. Through these findings, given the large number of patients with acute chest pain, conducting TCCor early improved substantially the therapeutic management in this group for allowing the taking of earlier clinical decision, directing more effectively treat or allowing high hospital safely and reducing unnecessary hospitalizations. These same researchers, after a two-year follow-up, published the results of prognostic ROMICAT study. Of the 368 patients, 333 (90.5%) completed the action. Thirty-five events were observed in 25 (6.8%) patients (AMI 12 and 23 revascularizations). The cumulative probability of major cardiac endpoints (MACE) increased with the degree of coronary artery disease (no CAD = 0%, nonobstructive CAD = 4.6% and obstructive CAD = 30.3%, p < 0.0001 ), as well as to associate the degree of CAD to segmental dysfunction of the left ventricle (LVSD) evidenced by MDCT (without stenosis or LVSD = 0.9%, a finding: LVSD = 15% stenosis or = 10.1%, both present = 62.4%, p < 0.0001). The C statistical test to predict MACE was 0.61 according to the TIMI scores and increased to 0.84 by adding the degree of the DAC TCCor and 0.91 when added degree of CAD and LVSD. From this study it can be concluded that among patients presenting to the emergency department with acute chest pain of low to intermediate risk for SCA the absence of CAD by TCCor provides a free period of cardiac events for two years, while the presence of coronary stenosis LVSD is associated with high probability of MACE in that período20. Similar results were found by Chow et al 21 that showed prognostic and incremental value of the severity of CAD, ejection fraction of the left ventricle and total load of CAD detected by TCCor on the classical clinical predictors. In a recent meta-analysis published in 2010, including 16 studies, some of which are listed here, with a total of 1,119 patients, showed S 96% (95% CI, 93-98%), and 92% (95% CI, 89-93%) and ROC curve of 0.98, also demonstrating the high value of coronary angiography for the diagnosis of significant coronary stenosis in the setting of acute chest pain. However, S and E are only related to the test and not to the practical use to estimate the likelihood of disease in the individual setting. The Likelihood Ratio (RV), in turn, is the chance that a positive test is a positive real and a negative test is a false negative. These latest tests therefore provide a better understanding of suspicion of the disease in question. A good diagnostic test therefore has high RV for a positive test and a lower RV to negative test. The TCCor this analysis showed a positive 10.12 RV and RV negative 0.09. A value greater than 10 positive for RV provides strong evidence to confirm the diagnosis, virtually conclusive. Similarly, too low to negative RV as 0.09, virtually ruled out the possibility of the cause of the chest pain is due to coronary disease significativa22. Recent multicenter, randomized studies in ACS Results obtained by single-center studies, multicentre randomized trials and were designed to confirm previous results in a better level of evidence. With the publication of three multicentre trials: CT-STAT23, ACRIN PA24 and ROMICAT II25, which showed consistent results with each other, the use of CT angiography of coronary arteries in the setting of acute chest pain, applied to the appropriate population, reached the criterion for class I indication with level of evidence a (Table 2). The study Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain Patients to Treatment (CT-STAT) involved 16 centers and a total of 699 patients, of whom 361 underwent TCCor and 338 CPM. With the primary goal of diagnostic efficiency (time for diagnosis), patients in the TCCor group had a reduction of 54% in that time (2.9 H x 6.3 h, p < 0.0001) compared to the standard protocol with CPM. The costs involved and safety were the secondary endpoints. With regard to costs, these also were smaller among patients using CT angiography, with a reduction of 38% ($ 2,137 x $ 3,458, p < 0.0001). Diagnostic strategies did not differ in major cardiac event rate (0.8% vs. 0.4%, p = 0.29) during the mean follow-up of six months. Therefore, this study showed that among patients with acute chest pain low risk use of TCCor resulted in earlier diagnosis, with less cost than the CPM, and with the same degree of segurança23. The study involved 1,370 patients ACRIN PA24 low risk to intermediate in five centers in the United States, with the primary objective of the safety profile (events after hospital discharge). This study showed that among patients who underwent TCCor, 640 (83%) had no DAC, which allowed the direct discharge from the emergency department compared to the standard protocol (49.6% vs. 22.7%, 95 %: 21.4 to 32.2), resulting in a significant reduction in hospital stay (12,3h vs. 24,7h, p < 0.001). The primary endpoint security was also demonstrated, none of the patients with negative coronary angiography showed myocardial infarction or cardiac death within 30 days of the examination. Thus, the diagnostic strategy using TCCor as the initial image in the emergency department for low-risk patients to intermediate allowed to proceed to the hospital safely after the negative test by increasing the medical discharge rates and the reduction in the length of time hospitalar24. The latest study, ROMICAT II25, had as its primary objective to access the hospital stay (arrival at the emergency until hospital discharge), since this reflects clinical information (diagnosis and treatment) and cost issues and logistics centers involved. Among the thousand patients enrolled, 501 were randomized to the TCCor group, and 499 patients were randomized to the standard treatment group, which was to follow specific chest pain protocols routine of the institutions involved (serials myocardial necrosis markers, electrocardiogram and other diagnostic test, not TCCor, or according to medical indication intervention). Comparing the patients randomized to the group submitted to the protocol standard care, patients undergoing TCCor had a significant reduction of 7,6h (p < 0.001) in the length of hospital stay. Within 8,6h arrival to the emergency, 50% of patients in the group had received TCCor hospital compared to only 10% of the standard protocol group. The time to reach the diagnosis, even in the subgroup with a final diagnosis of ACS was significantly lower in TCCor group than in the standard protocol group (10,4h x 18,7h and 10,6h x 18,8h, respectively). Similarly, during the 28-day follow-up period, the rate of events (secondary objective) was infrequent. In the standard protocol group were six events, and TCCor group there were two events. These two events in the TCCor group, the tomography examination accused significant coronary artery disease (stenosis > 50%), but with negative functional test, and initially opted for medical treatment. Critical analysis of multicenter studies The above scientific evidence provide subsidies for the indication of use of TCCor in the evaluation of patients with acute chest pain. Figures 1 and 2 show two cases of chest pain in the emergency room, and in Figure 1 we have a case with massive plate and proximal stenosis of AD, and in figure 2 a case with myocardial bridge and only discrete proximal mixed plate to myocardial bridge that does not cause significant stenosis light of AD. Note that although clinical symptoms, age and presentation in the emergency room are similar, only the first patient has benefited from being subjected to catheterization. Therefore, patient selection is crucial part for good diagnostic performance and therapeutic success of their evaluation protocols of chest pain. In the three multicenter studies, patients included were around 50% female, mean age 50 years, which significantly reduces the pretest probability of this study population. Another important question to be posed is whether in fact there is a need to perform additional diagnostic tests before hospital discharge for low-risk patients. The rationale for conducting any examination is whether, when compared to a control group, this examination will result in improvement in outcomes. In multicenter studies presented there was no evidence that the realization of TCCor reduced the incidence of heart attacks or deaths. In fact, the rate of major cardiac events among all patients involved in the studies was very low, making it impossible to know whether the TCCor brought some benefit. Regarding costs, the study CT-STAT, the research protocol in which CT angiography revealed stenosis between 25% and 70% patients were also submitted to the CPM. Thus, it generated more checks and costs of TCCor group, since lesions between 25% and 49% are not considered significant, as shown by the results: of 37 patients TCCor group subjected CPM 30 (81%) had Test normal functional. In ROMICAT II study, it is emphasized that in the face of a more efficient screening, this gain was not achieved at the risk of misdiagnosis. In that study, there has been no reported case in both groups, indicating that the more early from the emergency department with the use of high coronary angiography did not result in misdiagnosis, demonstrating the safety of the method. In the same study, however, the results showed that patients undergoing TCCor generated using more diagnostic tools, findings also described by Shreibati et al26, but not observed in the study CT-STAT23. However, when considering the final cost, the average cost of the visit rate and the end of the follow-up of 28 days was similar in TCCor group and the standard protocol group (p = 0.65). Therefore, protocols that make use of CT angiography of coronary arteries as the initial imaging test in the management of patients with acute and possible chest pain ACS, reduce the length of hospital stay, come to earlier diagnosis, increasing efficiency in the medical decision-making in the room emergency, without generating an increase in the total costs and without risk of discharge of patients with ACS (likely less than 1% in the three multicentre trials). CT angiography of coronary and cost effectiveness Despite all the advantages demonstrated, that a method is incorporated into the diagnostic routine, it is essential that in addition to his accurate diagnostic performance, a method is cost effective. In a recent multicenter study directed to the total health care costs and related to CAD 8,235 in low-risk patients undergoing TCCor and CPM, the cost to the end of the year were 25.9% lower in patients undergoing TCCor compared to that CPM performed with an average of $ 1,075 per paciente27. This difference was mainly due to less need for invasive examination and revascularization among patients undergoing angiography of coronary artery. These findings extend to a similar study with 9,690 undergoing intermediate-risk individuals also TCCor or CPM28. In a follow-up of nine months, the CAD-related costs were a third lower for individuals undergoing TCCor, with an average of $ 467 per patient. The cost related to medication and the need for revascularization was similar between groups, and the difference was due to the need for additional diagnostic tests in patients undergoing CPM, especially CATE. In 2011, Miller et al. TCCor added to the standard protocol in the risk stratification of patients with acute chest pain in the emergency room and randomized the use of resources with the standard protocol. A total of 60 patients were involved in this study. Total resources used in TCCor group within 90 days of follow-up was $ 10,134 vs. $ 16,579 in the standard group. By using this additional feature, besides the reduction of total costs, there were fewer hospital readmissions (6/30 vs. 16/30, p = 0.007) and greater power of CAD diagnosis (19 patients were diagnosed with CAD and 18 ( 95%) of TCCor group) 29. Clinical impact of new evidence Like almost about 10% of the stress tests are inconclusive leading to CATE, and these are shown, most of the time, negative, the study ACIC evaluated the correlation between stress tests (CPM, TE and echocardiography stress) with TCCor, and compared the diagnostic performance with CATE in 47 centers. A total of 6,198 patients, 1,548 (24.9%) had normal test, 1,027 (16.6%) were inconclusive and 3,623 (58.5%) were positive. In multivariate analysis, the result of the stress test did not bring incremental value on the Framingham risk score. AS, E, VPP and VPN general of the stress tests was 60.4%, 34.2%, 59.3% and 35.2%, respectively. The diagnostic performance for stenosis > 50% of TCCor was S = 93.7%, E = 37.9%, PPV = 70.6% and NPV = 79.1%. The association between the findings of TCCor and CATE was statistically significant (OR: 9.1, 95% CI: 5.57 to 14.81, p < 0.001), while the results of the stress tests and CATE had no relationship ( OR: 0.79, 95% CI: 0.56 to 1.11, p = 0.17). Thus, the degree of stenosis in TCCor was the strongest predictor of additional significant coronary lesion in CATE, with the stress test results having no incremental value on the variables clínicas30. In a recent publication of the CONFIRM record, the use of TCCor proved to be a diagnostic tool cost-efficient in CAD research. With about 15 000 patients included, with 56.4% of patients with typical and atypical chest pain, CATE rates were very low in patients without CHD or CHD discrete detected by TCCor, revealing that in real life doctors are accepting the results obtained by TCCor, in this case, its high negative predictive value. Nevertheless, these same patients showed no increase in major adverse cardiac event rates, confirming the safety of the test. Similarly, patients undergoing invasive angiography after conducting TCCor, percutaneous revascularization rate was directly related to the degree of coronary artery disease detected by CT, jumping from 2% to 28.5% for those with mild disease and obstructive disease respectively, as well as for surgical revascularization. Thus, this record, which translates medical practice real life, explains that the inclusion of TCCor in the diagnostic routine does not translate into increased use of resources and thus costs. On the contrary, there was a reduction in procedures, especially in high-cost procedures, being as highly effective and safe examination in screening patients aterosclerótica31 disease research.   Conclusion In the setting of acute chest pain, the use of coronary angiography in low groups risk intermediary proves to be an efficient, effective and safe, with significant prognostic value, reducing costs and hospitalization time and optimizing treatment in rooms emergency.   Authors' contributions Conception and design of the research and manuscript Writing: the EEC Prazeres, Cury RC, Ram ACC, Rochitte EC; Data collection and statistical analysis: the EEC Prazeres, Rochitte EC; Analysis and interpretation of data: the EEC Prazeres, Ram ACC, Rochitte EC; Critical revision of the manuscript on the intellectual content: Cury RC, Ram ACC, Rochitte EC. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   