 SUMMARY Coronary angiography has recently emerged as an accurate diagnostic tool in the evaluation of coronary artery disease, providing diagnostic and prognostic data that correlate directly with the data provided by coronary angiography. As technology develops, enabling improved temporal, spatial resolution, better coverage of cardiac volume with significant reduction in radiation dose, added to the need for risk stratification protocols more effective for patients with chest pain in the emergency room, its application started to be tested in the setting of acute chest pain, since about two-thirds of invasive coronary angiograms show no significant obstructive coronary artery disease. In daily practice, without the use of more efficient technologies, such as CT angiography of coronary arteries, it remains a challenge to the doctor's emergency room the safe and efficient stratification of patients with acute chest pain. Recently, several studies, including three randomized, showed favorable results to the use of that technology in the emergency department for patients with low to intermediate likelihood of coronary artery disease. In this review, we present the data of the usage of coronary angiography for risk stratification in patients with chest pain in the emergency room, its diagnostic and prognostic value and cost-effectiveness, and a critical analysis of recently published multi-center studies. Keywords: coronary artery disease; CT/ use; Chest pain; hospital emergency service Introduction In this systematic review we discuss the current evidence of CT angiography of the coronary arteries and the recent impact of the publication, almost simultaneously, three large controlled trials, multi-center, randomized, using this new technology in clinical practice. The clinical and epidemiological importance of coronary artery disease, CT angiography technology coronary arteries and its recent evolution, the initial studies single-center, meta-analyzes and ultimately randomized studies, a critical analysis of these and the latest data on cost -efetividade and clinical impact are reviewed. Clinical and epidemiological importance of coronary artery disease and acute coronary syndrome In 2008, the overall rate of deaths attributed to cardiovascular disease (CVD) was 244.8 per 100,000 inhabitants, corresponding to 811,940 deaths out of a total of 2,471,984, or one out of every three deaths in the United States. Based on the data, about 2,200 Americans die every day in the United States due to cardiac causes, or one death every 39 seconds. Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is responsible for almost 50% of these deaths (405,309), with 195,000 cases of acute myocardial infarction, resulting in a coronary event every 25 seconds and approximately one death per minute, despite USD 297.7 billion spent on CVD, corresponding to 16% of total health expenses, higher than any other group of diseases 1. Just like in the United States, in Brazil, cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of death from chronic noncommunicable diseases, in spite of financial expenses being the largest among the disease groups. Despite the decline of 26% observed in death rates attributed to cardiovascular causes between 1996 and 2004, Brazil has one of the highest death rates from cardiovascular diseases in South America (286 per 100,000 inhabitants), only exceeded by Guyana and Suriname. Similarly, this group of disease has the highest rates of hospital admissions. In 2007, 12.7% of hospital admissions not related to pregnancy and 27.4% of admissions of patients aged over 60 years were due to cardiovascular diseases 2. In view of these worrying figures, the diagnostic evaluation of patients with acute chest pain is a major challenge in the emergency rooms, both from the diagnostic and optimization standpoint and correct targeting of resources. Since the Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) represents almost one-fifth of the causes of thoracic pain in the emergency rooms, and has high morbidity and mortality, the initial approach to these patients is always done in order to confirm or exclude the diagnosis, in order to optimize the time to begin the treatment or to proceed to hospital discharge safely. Current protocols, however, are not effective in screening the group of patients with intermediate and low risk acute chest pain where markers of myocardial necrosis are normal and electrocardiograph changes are non-existent or non-specific. These protocols, until recently, did not include diagnostic tools that provided information on the presence and severity of the DAC. As a result, the confirmation or exclusion of ACS, particularly in patients with unstable angina, demanded overuse of diagnostic tests, resulting in too many hospital admissions or possibly delayed initiation of treatment. Thus, the recent introduction of coronary angiography by computed tomography starts a new scenario in the emergency department for the evaluation of patients with acute chest pain. Coronary angiography technology CT: The CT angiography of coronaries With the technological advances over the past decades, since the introduction of the electron beam tomography, capable of measuring coronary artery calcification to the current tomography with multiple detectors columns (MDCT), the ability to perform cardiac imaging got a significant increase in diagnostic accuracy. Multiple studies have shown that coronary stenoses can be identified non-invasively by computed tomography if high quality images are produced. The quality of cardiac imaging by CT is directly related to the evolution of CT scanners. The increase in the speed of rotation of X-ray tubes for speeds less than 500 ms, and the increase in the number of detectors from 4 to 64 or more, along with the reduction in the thickness of the acquired slice to submillimetric levels, brought a significant increase in diagnostic accuracy of coronary artery disease by coronary angiography CT 3, allowing the diagnostic visualization of cardiac structures and, more specifically, the anatomical evaluation of the wall and the lumen of the coronary arteries with high sensitivity and specificity, as well as the extent of this disease. Nevertheless, the concern about the safety of the patient before the radiation exposure has always guided the evolution of this technology and, through the latest generation of CT scanners, they obtain an optimal image quality, with significant lower radiation doses than the first ones, reducing the exposure to more than 50%. Thus, coronary angiography (CAG) has become a useful diagnostic tool in the setting of acute chest pain in the emergency department, especially in cases of suspected acute coronary syndrome without ST elevation, providing medical information of high quality and reproducibility and a new perspective in the diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic decision. Controlled studies in CT angiography of coronary angiography Accuracy of coronary in CAD - Meta-analysis and Controlled Clinical Studies Since the introduction of CT scanners with 64 columns detectors in 2003, more than 50 studies have been published comparing the diagnostic performance of CAG with the standard reference, invasive coronary angiography (CATE). These studies have revealed great diagnostic performance per patient, with high sensitivity (S) and specificity (E), ranging from 91% to 99% and 74% to 96%, respectivamente4-8. However, the method validation occurred with the publication of three studies multicentric 9-11 designed to access and refine the diagnostic performance of CAG in different populations (Table 1). One of these studies was ACCURACY (Assessment by Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography of Individuals Undergoing Invasive Coronary Angiography) 9, which involved patients without CHD known with stable angina or had altered functional test. CAD's diagnostic performance detecting stenosis > 70% when compared to CATE was S = 94%, E = 83%, Positive Predictive Value (PPV) 48% and Negative Predictive Value (NPV) 99%, with the area under the ROC curve being 0.95, revealing a high diagnostic accuracy both in confirming and excluding significant coronary stenosis. In another multicenter CORE 64 (Coronary Evaluation on 64) assessing 291 patients with clinical indication for invasive coronary angiography, the prevalence of significant CAD was 56% for reduction of threshold luminal > 50%. In this study, which was the first and only one to quantitatively measure the coronary stenoses by angiography, S, E, PPV and NPV per patient were 85%, 90%, 91% and 83%, respectively. The findings of lower VPN and higher VPP are due to higher prevalence of CAD in this study. The accuracy of the method, defined as the area under the ROC curve, was 0.91 for CAD confirmed by coronary angiography. Additionally, CAG was similar to CATE to predict the need for coronary revascularization in the following 30 days. The European prospective multicentric study evaluated 360 patients without CAD known as acute chest pain and stable angina 11. As expected, the prevalence of CAD was high (68%), and diagnostic CAG performance revealed S, E, PPV and NPV of 99%, 64%, 86% and 97%, respectively. Together, the three multi-center studies have shown high sensitivity and NPV in individuals without known CAD, identifying the ability of CAG to detect and exclude significant coronary stenosis. Initial studies of coronary angiography in the SCA - single-center studies and meta-analyzes with method validation, revealing its high diagnostic performance, especially in its high negative predictive value, coupled with the absence of an effective protocol and risk stratification insurance in SCA without ST-segment elevation in risk groups low to intermediate studies investigated the inclusion of CAG in the diagnostic investigation of pictures of acute chest pain in emergency departments. Meijboom et al12 evaluated 104 patients presenting with ACS without ST-elevation, classified as high (n = 71) and low risk (n = 33) according to clinical and electrocardiographic criteria and myocardial necrosis markers.

 Using the CATE as a reference standard, the diagnostic performance of CAG in detecting significant coronary lesions (stenosis > 50%) showed S = 100% (88/88, 95% CI 95-100), E = 75% (12/16, 95% CI 47-92), PPV = 96% (88/92, 95% CI 89-99) and VPN = 100% (12/12, 95% CI 70-100), revealing the high sensitivity of CAG in detecting significant coronary stenosis as far as to exclude the presence of significant CAD in this group of patients with high pretest probability of coronary artery disease. Similarly, Hoffmann et al 13, in a cohort of 103 patients with acute chest pain in the emergency room, with ECG and normal cardiac enzymes also found similar results to the above. Of the 103 hospitalized patients, 14 were diagnosed with AMS (acute myocardial stroke without ST elevation=5 and unstable angina= 9), and the CAG reached the diagnosis of significant stenosis in five patients diagnosed with acute myocardial stroke without ST elevation. Three other patients underwent CATE because of provocative tests of ischemia that resulted positive, and, as the CATE, CAG proved to be accurate in excluding coronary atherosclerosis. In the remaining patients, CAG was able to exclude the disease and no significant cardiac events were observed in this subgroup during the follow-up period.
  Moreover, the presence of CAD on coronary CT angiography added information on ACS prediction using the traditional risk factors.


 In the study led by Rubinshtein et al 14, with a total of 58 patients, the diagnosis of ACS was confirmed in 20 patients with CAG revealing significant coronary lesions (stenosis > 50%) in 23 subjects, resulting in S = 100% E = 92%, PPV = 87% and NPV = 100%. Of the other 35 patients, 15 showed no CAD and the remaining 20 showed no obstructive coronary artery disease. During the follow-up of 15 months, no death or myocardial infarction among the 35 patients in whom CAG showed no significant stenosis. Thus, the sensitivity of TCCor to predict major cardiovascular events (death, myocardial infarction or revascularization) during the hospitalization and follow-up of 15 months was 92%, E = 76%, PPV = 52% and NPV = 97%. In another study involving 586 patients with suspected ACS classified as low risk by the TIMI score (Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction), a coronary CT angiography was immediately performed in 285 patients, and after 9 hours in other 283 patients. In this scenario, the TCCor was able to exclude significant coronary artery disease in 476 (84%) subjects, being released safely and quickly from the emergency department. None of these patients had death or nonfatal heart attack within 30 days of the performance of the exam15. Researchers from Seoul National University16 randomized 268 patients with acute chest pain to undergo CAG with 64-detector MDCT and reduced the need for hospitalization in the group classified as intermediate risk for CAD, as well as reduced hospital length of stay.
 Following 30 days, no patient group undergoing CAG suffered a major cardiac event, while one conventional strategy's patient was the acute myocardial stroke victim. Goldstein et al 17 came to the same conclusions in a randomized study. Besides evaluating the diagnostic efficacy, this study evaluated the safety and efficiency of the method. The CAG was able to exclude and readily identify coronary disease as a cause of chest pain in 75% of cases, including 67 patients with normal coronary arteries and 8 patients with significant coronary artery disease. With regard to safety, compared to the standard protocol (Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy [MPS]), the TCCor was as safe as scintigraphy. Moreover, the time for diagnosis (3.4h x 15h) and cost (US$ 1,586 x US$1,872) were significantly lower in the group that used TCCor (p < 0.001), also revealing that coronary angiotomography can safely, effectively and efficiently confirm or exclude CAD as the cause of acute chest pain in the emergency room. Because many institutional protocols use the Exercise Stress Test (EST) as stratifying risk in patients with acute chest pain, evaluated the prognostic value of TCCor compared to EST. From a total of 471 patients, 424 (90%) completed the follow-up of 2.6 years. A total of 44 major cardiac events occurred in 30 patients (4 deaths from cardiac causes, 6 nonfatal AMI, 23 revascularizations and 11 episodes of unstable angina). The presence of obstructive CAD was associated with a significantly higher rate of events, when compared to the absence of obstructive CAD (6.8% vs. 1.2%, p < 0.001). The results of the EST revealed an annual event rate of 1.6%, when regular, 1.9%, when positive (EST ischemic response), and 4.6% when inconclusive results. A statistically significant increase in global risk analysis was detected after adding the findings of TCCor (Qui2 13.7 versus 37.7, p < 0.001, respectively). The resulting increase in the net reclassification index (NRI) of the patient was also evaluated with NRI 54% EST (160 patients reclassified as more severe and 249 as lighter) and NRI 80% with the results of TCCor (132 reclassified as a more serious and 277 as lighter). Thus, the TCCor findings were presented as a strong predictor of future cardiac events, showing incremental value on the clinical findings and of the ergometric test 18. The ROMICAT19 study showed that in a population with low to intermediate risk of ACS with acute chest pain, 50% showed no coronary lesions to TCCor. In this study, diagnostic performance TCCor showed a S = 100%, E = 54% PPV = 17% NPV = 100% for the assessment of the presence of any coronary atherosclerotic plaque. When analyzed the presence of obstructive CAD (> 50% luminal narrowing), the sensitivity was 77%, E = 87%, PPV = 35% and NPV = 98%. Both the presence of CAD, as the presence of significant stenosis were able to predict the ACS using TCCor regardless of the risk factors or the TIMI score. Through these findings, given the large number of patients with acute chest pain, the early conduction of TCCor improved substantially the therapeutic management in this group, by allowing the making of an earlier clinical decision, directing more effectively treat or allowing safely hospital discharge and reducing unnecessary hospitalizations. These same researchers, after a two-year follow-up, published the results of prognostic ROMICAT study. Of the 368 patients, 333 (90.5%) completed the action. Thirty-five events were observed in 25 (6.8%) patients (12 AMI and 23 revascularizations). The cumulative probability of major cardiac outcomes (MACE) increased according to the level of coronary artery disease (no CAD = 0%, nonobstructive CAD = 4.6% and obstructive CAD = 30.3%, p < 0.0001), as well as by associating the level of CAD to segmental dysfunction of the left ventricle (LVSD) evidenced by MDCT (without stenosis or LVSD = 0.9%, a finding: LVSD = 15% stenosis or = 10.1%, both present = 62.4%, p < 0.0001). The C statistical test to predict MACE was 0.61 according to the TIMI scores and increased to 0.84 by adding the degree of the DAC TCCor and 0.91 when added degree of CAD and LVSD. From this study it can be concluded that among patients presented to the emergency room with acute chest pain with low to intermediate risk for SCA the absence of CAD by TCCor provides a free period of cardiac events for two years, while the presence of coronary stenosis LVSD is associated with high probability of MACE in that period20. Similar results were found by Chow et al.21 that showed prognostic and incremental value of the severity of CAD, ejection fraction of the left ventricle and total load of CAD detected by TCCor on the classical clinical predictors. A recent meta-analysis published in 2010 that included 16 studies, some of which are listed here, with a total of 1,119 patients, showed S = 96% (95% CI, 93-98%), Sp = 92% (95% CI, 89-93%) and ROC curve of 0.98, also demonstrating the high value of coronary CT angiography for the diagnosis of significant coronary stenosis in the presence of acute chest pain. 
 However, S and Sp are only related to the test and not to the practical use to estimate the probability of disease in the individual setting. The likelihood ratio (LR), in turn, is the chance that a positive test is a true positive and a negative test is a false negative.  These last tests, therefore, provide a better understanding of the suspected disease. A good diagnostic test, consequently, has a high LR for a positive test and a low LR for the negative test.  The CTCor in this analysis showed a positive LR of 10.12 and negative LR of 0.09.  A value greater than 10 positive for RV provides strong evidence to confirm the diagnosis, virtually conclusive. Similarly, a value too low to negative RV, such as 0.09, virtually ruled out the possibility of the cause of the chest pain is due to sgnificative coronary disease22. Recent multicenter and randomized studies in ACS Results obtained by single-center studies, multicenter trials and randomized were designed to confirm previous results with a better level of evidence. With the publication of three multicentric trials: CT-STAT23, ACRIN PA24 and ROMICAT II25, which showed consistent results with each other, the use of CT angiography of coronary arteries in the setting of acute thoracic pain, applied to the appropriate population, reached the criterion for class I indication with level A of evidence (Table 2). The study Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain Patients to Treatment (CT-STAT) involved 16 centers and a total of 699 patients, of which 361 underwent TCCor and 338 MPS. With the primary goal of diagnostic efficiency (time for diagnosis), patients in the TCCor group had a reduction of 54% in that time (2.9 H x 6.3 h, p < 0.0001) compared to the standard protocol with MPS. The costs involved and safety were the secondary endpoints. Regarding the costs, these were also smaller among patients using CT's angiography, with a reduction of 38% ($ 2,137 x $ 3,458, p < 0.0001). Diagnostic strategies did not differ in major cardiac event rate (0.8% vs. 0.4%, p = 0.29) during the mean follow-up of six months. Therefore, this study showed that among patients with low risk acute chest pain, the use of TCCor resulted in earlier diagnosis, with less cost than the MPS, and with the same degree of security23. The  ACRIN PA24 study involved 1,370 patients with low to intermediate risk in five centers in the United States, with the primary objective of safety profile (events after hospital discharge). This study has shown that 640 (83%) of the patients who underwent TCCor did not have CAD, which allowed for direct hospital discharge from the emergency department compared to the standard protocol (49.6% x 22.7%, IC 95%: 21.4 to 32.2), resulting in a significant reduction in the length of hospital stays (12.3 h vs. 24.7 h, p < 0.001). The primary endpoint security was also demonstrated, none of the patients with negative coronary angiography showed myocardial infarction or cardiac death within 30 days of the examination. Thus, the diagnostic strategy using TCCor as the initial image in the emergency department for low to intermediate risk patients allowed to proceed to the hospital discharge safely after the negative test by increasing the medical discharge rates and the reduction in the length of the hospital stay time 24. The latest study, ROMICAT II25, had as its primary objective to access the hospital stay (arrival at the emergency until hospital discharge), since this reflects clinical information (diagnosis and treatment) and cost issues and logistics centers involved. Among the thousand patients enrolled, 501 were randomized to the TCCor group, and 499 patients were randomized to the standard treatment group, which was to follow specific chest pain protocols routine of the institutions involved (serials myocardial necrosis markers, electrocardiogram and other diagnostic test, not TCCor, or according to medical indication intervention). Comparing the patients randomized to the group submitted to the protocol standard care, patients undergoing TCCor had a significant reduction of 7.6h (p < 0.001) in the length of hospital stay. Within 8.6h  from the arrival to the emergency room, 50% of patients in the TCCor group had received hospital discharge, compared to only 10% of the standard protocol group. The time to reach the diagnosis, even in the subgroup with a final diagnosis of ACS, was significantly lower in TCCor group than in the standard protocol group (10.4h x 18.7h and 10.6h x 18.8h, respectively). Similarly, during the 28-day follow-up period, the rate of events (secondary objective) was infrequent. In the standard protocol group occurred six events, and in the TCCor group were two events.  In these two events, in the TCCor group the tomography examination accused significant coronary artery disease (stenosis > 50%), but negative for functional test, being initially opted for medical treatment. Critical analysis of multicenter studies The aforementioned scientific evidence provides subsidies for the indication of CTCor use to assess patients with acute chest pain. Figures 1 and 2 show two cases of chest pain in the emergency room, and in Figure 1 we have a case with massive plate and proximal stenosis of AD, and in Figure 2 a case with myocardial bridge and only discrete proximal mixed plate to myocardial bridge that does not cause significant stenosis light of AD. Note that although clinical symptoms, age and presentation in the emergency room are similar, only the first patient has benefited from being subjected to catheterization. Therefore, the patient selection is a crucial part for a good diagnostic performance and therapeutic success of its evaluation protocols of chest pain. In the three multicenter studies, patients included were around 50% female, average age of 50 years, which significantly reduces the pretest probability of this study population. Another important question to be posed is whether in fact there is a need to perform additional diagnostic tests before hospital discharge for low-risk patients. The rationale for performing any examination is whether, when compared to a control group, this examination will result in outcome improvement.  In the multicenter studies shown here there was no evidence that the performance of the CTCor reduced the incidence of infarctions or deaths
 In fact, the rate of major cardiac events among all patients involved in the studies was very low, making it impossible to know whether the TCCor brought some benefit. Regarding costs, the study CT-STAT, the research protocol in which CT angiography revealed stenosis between 25% and 70% patients were also submitted to the CPM. Thus, it generated more checks and costs of TCCor group, since lesions between 25% and 49% are not considered significant, as shown by the results: of 37 patients TCCor group subjected to MPS, 30 (81%) will present normal functional test. In ROMICAT II study, it is emphasized that in the face of a more efficient screening, this gain was not achieved at the risk of misdiagnosis. In that study, there has been no reported case in both groups, indicating that the greatest number of discharges from the emergency department with the use of high coronary angiography did not result in misdiagnosis, demonstrating the safety of the method. In the same study, however, the results showed that patients undergoing TCCor generated using more diagnostic tools, findings also described by Shreibati et al.26, but not observed in the CT-STAT23 study. However, when considering the final cost, the average cost of the visit index and the end of the follow-up of 28 days was similar in TCCor group and the standard protocol group (p = 0.65). Therefore, protocols that make use of the CT angiography of coronary arteries as the initial imaging test in the management of patients with acute and possible chest pain and possible ACS, reduce the duration of hospital stay, come to earlier diagnosis, increasing efficiency in the medical decision-making in the emergency room, without generating an increase in the total costs and without the risk of patients with ACS (likely less than 1% in the three multicentre trials) discharge. Coronary angiotomography and cost effectiveness
Despite all the demonstrated advantages, for a method to be incorporated in the diagnostic routine, it is essential for it to be a cost effective method in addition to its accurate diagnostic performance. 
 In a recent multicenter study directed to the total health care costs and related to CAD 8,235 in low-risk patients undergoing TCCor and CPM, the costs at the end of the year were 25.9% lower in patients undergoing the TCCor compared to those that did a CPM with an average of $ 1,075 per paciente27. This difference was mainly due to a lower need for invasive examination and revascularization among patients undergoing the coronary CT angiography. These findings can be extended to a similar study with 9,690 intermediate-risk individuals also submitted to the CTCor or to the MPS28.  In a follow-up of nine months, the CAD-related costs were a third lower for individuals submitted to the TCCor, with an average of $ 467 per patient. The cost associated to the medication and the need for revascularization was similar between groups, and the difference was due to the need for additional diagnostic tests in patients undergoing the CPM, especially CATE. In 2011, Miller et al. They added the TCCor to the standard protocol in the risk stratification of patients with acute thoracic pain in the emergency room and randomized the use of resources with the standard protocol. A total of 60 patients were involved in this study. Total resources used in TCCor group within 90 days of follow-up were $ 10,134 vs. $ 16,579 in the standard group. By using this additional feature, besides the reduction of total costs, there were fewer hospital readmissions (6/30 vs. 16/30, p = 0.007) and a bigger power of the CAD's diagnosis (19 patients were diagnosed with CAD and 18 (95%) of TCCor group) 29. Clinical impact of new evidence As almost about 10% of stress tests are inconclusive leading to coronary angiography, and these are negative in the majority of cases, the ACIC's study evaluated the correlation between stress testing (MPS, ET and stress echocardiography) with the CTCor, and compared the diagnostic performance with the CA in 47 centers. A total of 6,198 patients, 1,548 (24.9%) presented a normal test, 1,027 (16.6%) were inconclusive and 3,623 (58.5%) were positive. In the multivariate analysis, the result of the stress test did not bring incremental value on the Framingham risk score. AS, E, VPP and VPN average of the stress tests was of 60.4%, 34.2%, 59.3% and 35.2%, respectively. The diagnostic performance for stenosis > 50% of TCCor was S = 93.7%, E = 37.9%, PPV = 70.6% and NPV = 79.1%. The association between the findings of the TCCor and of the CATE was statistically significant (OR: 9.1, 95% CI: 5.57 to 14.81, p < 0.001), while the results of the stress tests and CATE's had no relationship (OR: 0.79, 95% CI: 0.56 to 1.11, p = 0.17). Thus, the level of stenosis in TCCor was the strongest predictor of additional significant coronary injury in CATE's, with the stress test results having no incremental value on the variables clínicas30. In a recent publication of the CONFIRM record, the use of the TCCor proved to be a diagnostic tool cost-efficient in the CAD's research. With about 15 000 patients included, with 56.4% of the patients with typical and atypical chest pain, CATE rates were very low in patients without CHD or CHD discrete detected by the TCCor, revealing that in real life doctors are accepting the results obtained by the TCCor, in this case, its high negative predictive value. Nevertheless, these same patients showed no increase in major adverse cardiac event rates, confirming the safety of the test. Similarly, from patients undergoing the invasive angiography after conducting the TCCor, the percutaneous revascularization rate was directly related to the level of coronary artery disease detected by the CT, ranging from 2% to 28.5% for those with mild disease and obstructive disease respectively, as well as for surgical revascularization. Thus, this record, which translates real life medical practice, explains that the inclusion of the TCCor in the diagnostic routine does not translate into the increased use of resources and, consequently, costs. On the contrary, there was a reduction in the procedures, especially in high-cost procedures, being as highly effective and safe examination in screening patients Atherosclerosis 31 disease research. Conclusion In the setting of acute chest pain, the use of CT coronary angiography in groups of low to intermediate risk has shown to be an efficient, effective and safe method, with significant prognostic value, reducing costs and hospitalization time and optimizing treatment in emergency rooms.
 Authors' contributions
Conception and design of the research and the manuscript's writing:
dos Prazeres CEE, Cury RC, Carneiro ACC, Rochitte CE
Data collection and statistical analysis:
dos Prazeres CEE, Rochitte CE;
Data analysis and interpretation:
dos Prazeres CEE, Carneiro ACC, Rochitte CE;
Critical review of the manuscript regarding intellectual content:
Cury RC, Carneiro ACC, Rochitte CE.
 Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   