 SUMMARY THE angiotomografia of the coronary arteries has recently emerged as a diagnostic tool accurate in the evaluation of coronary artery disease, providing diagnostic data and prognoses that correlate directly with the data provided by coronary angiography. With the technological evolution, allowing the improvement in temporal resolution, spatial, better coverage of the heart volume with significant reduction of radiation dose, added to the need for protocols of risk stratification are most effective for patients with chest pain in the emergency department, his application went on to be tested in the setting of chest pain acute, since about two-thirds of the angiography coronary invasive does not demonstrate coronary heart disease obstructive significant. In daily practice, without the use of more efficient technologies, such as the angiotomografia of coronary disease, it remains a challenge to the medical emergency department of the stratification of safe and efficient patient with chest pain acute. Recently, several studies, including three randomized trials, showed favorable results to the use of this technology in the emergency room for patients with low to intermediate probability of coronary artery disease. In this review, we present the data of the use of the angiotomografia of coronary in risk stratification of patients with chest pain in the emergency room, its diagnostic value, prognosis and cost-effectiveness and a critical analysis of the recent multicenter studies published. Keywords: artery Disease, coronary; Tomography / utilization; chest Pain; hospital Service emergency Introduction in This systematic review we discuss the current evidence of the angiotomografia of the coronary arteries, and the recent impact of the publication, almost simultaneously, three major studies-controlled, multi-center and randomized, in the use of this new technology in clinical practice. Are reviewed the clinical significance and epidemiology of coronary artery disease, the technology of the angiotomografia of the coronary arteries and their recent evolution, the initial studies unicêntricos, meta-analyses and, finally, the randomized studies, a critical analysis of these and the latest data on cost-effectiveness and clinical impact. The clinical importance and epidemiology of coronary artery disease and acute coronary syndrome In 2008, the overall rate of deaths attributed to Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) was 244,8 per 100 thousand inhabitants, representing the 811.940 deaths of a total of 2.471.984, or one in every three deaths in the United States. Based on these data, approximately 2,200 americans die per day in the United States cause heart, or one death every 39 seconds. The Coronary Artery Disease (cad) is responsible for almost 50% of these deaths (405.309), with 195 thousand cases of acute myocardial infarction, translating into an event, coronary artery every 25 seconds and approximately one death per minute, regardless of the expenditures on CVD$ 297,7 billion, which account for 16% of total expenditure on health, more than in any other group of diseases1. As well as in the United States, in Brazil, cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of death by non-communicable chronic diseases, in spite of the financial costs being the largest among the groups of diseases. Despite the decline of 26% observed in the rates of death attributed to cause cardiovascular between 1996 and 2004, Brazil has one of the highest rates of death due to CVD in South America (286 per 100 thousand inhabitants), only exceeded by the rates presented by Guyana and Suriname. In the same sense, this group of disease has the highest rates of hospital admissions. In 2007, 12.7% of hospital admissions not related to pregnancy and 27.4% of admissions of patients with age above 60 years were due to diseases cardiovasculares2. In the face of these numbers troubling, the diagnostic evaluation of patients with chest pain, acute represents a great challenge in the emergency rooms, both from the point of view of diagnosis as optimization and correct targeting of resources. As the Acute Coronary Syndrome (SCA) represents almost a fifth of the causes of chest pain in the emergency rooms, and have a high mortality and morbidity, the initial approach of these patients is always done in order to confirm or dispel the diagnosis, seeking to optimize the time to the beginning of treatment or proceed to the hospital safely. The current protocols, however, are not effective in sorting the group of patients with chest pain acute intermediate risk, and low, where the markers of myocardial necrosis are normal and the electrocardiographic abnormalities are non-existent or unspecific. These protocols, until a short time ago, they did not involve diagnostic tools that provide information about the presence and severity of cad. As a result, the confirmation or exclusion of ACS, particularly in patients with unstable angina, necessitated the use of excessive diagnostic tests, resulting in hospital admissions too, or, possibly, in the delay at the beginning of the treatment. In this way, the recent introduction of angiography of coronary computed tomography starts a new scenario in the emergency department for the evaluation of patients with chest pain acute. The technology of angiography of coronary computed tomography: The Angiotomografia of the Coronary With the advancement of technology over the past decades,since the introduction of the ct scanner electron beam capable of measuring coronary artery calcification until the Result current with Multiple Columns of Detectors (MDCT), the ability to make images heart won significant increase in diagnostic accuracy. Multiple studies have shown that stenosis coronary artery can be identified in a non-invasive by computed tomography if high quality images are reproduced. The quality of the image heart the cat has a direct relationship with the evolution of ct scanner. The increase in the speed of rotation of the x-ray tubes for speeds less than 500 ms and the increase in the number of detectors from 4 to 64 or more, as well as the reduction in the thickness of the cut purchased to levels submilimétricos, brought a significant increase in the diagnostic accuracy of coronary heart disease by coronary angiography tomography computadorizada3, allowing the visualization of the diagnostic use of the cardiac structures and, more specifically, the evaluation of the anatomical wall and lumen of the coronary arteries with high sensitivity and specificity, as well as the extension of this disease. Nevertheless, the concern with the safety of the patient before the radiation exposure always guided the evolution of this technology and, through the ct scanner of the last generation, to obtain images of good quality with radiation doses significantly smaller than the initial, thus reducing the exposure by more than 50%. In this way, the angiotomografia of the coronary (TCCor) has become a diagnostic tool useful in the scenario of chest pain acute in the emergency department, especially in cases of suspected acute coronary syndrome without supradesnivelamento ST, offering the medical information of high quality and reproducibility, and a new perspective in the diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic decision. The controlled studies in angiotomografia coronary Accuracy of angiotomografia coronary in the DAC - Meta-analyses and Controlled Clinical trials Since the introduction of the ct scanner with 64 columns of detectors in 2003, more than 50 studies have been published comparing the performance diagnostic TCCor with the reference standard, the angiocoronariografia invasive (CATE). These studies have revealed great performance diagnostic by the patient, with high Sensitivity (S) and Specificity (E), ranging from 91% to 99% and 74% to 96%, respectivamente4-8. However, the validation of the method occurred with the publication of three studies multicêntricos9-11 designed to access and drill down into the performance diagnostic of TCCor in different populations (Table 1). One of these studies was the ACCURACY (Assessment by Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography of Individuals Undergoing Invasive Coronary Angiography)9, which involved patients without DAC is known with the framework of stable angina or who had had functional test changed. The performance diagnostic TCCor to detect stenosis > 70% when compared to the CATE was S = 94% = 83%, Positive Predictive Value (PPV) 48%, and Negative Predictive Value (npv) of 99%, with the area under the ROC curve of 0.95, revealing the high diagnostic accuracy both to confirm and to exclude stenosis of the coronary significant. In another multicenter study, the CORE64 (Coronary Evaluation on 64)10, have been included 291 patients with and without DAC is known with calcium score of Agatston < 600, resulting in a higher prevalence of CHD, 56% for the threshold reduction in luminal > 50%. In this study, which was the first and only one to quantitatively measure the stenosis, the coronary by angiotomografia, S, E, PPV and VPN, per patient, were 85%, 90%, 91% and 83%, respectively. The findings of the smaller VPN, and higher VPP due to the higher prevalence of the IPC in this study. The accuracy of the method, defined as the area under the ROC curve was 0.91 for the IPC confirmed by the CATE. In addition, the TCCor was similar to CATE to predict the need for coronary revascularization in the follow-up of 30 days. The prospective multi-center study committee evaluated 360 patients without DAC is known with chest pain and acute angina estável11. As expected, the prevalence of DAC was high (68%), and the performance diagnostic TCCor revealed S, E, PPV and VPN of 99%, 64%, 86% and 97%, respectively. Together,the three multicenter studies showed a high sensitivity and a VPN in individuals without DAC is known, identifying the ability of the TCCor on to detect and delete stenosis coronary significant. Initial studies of the angiotomografia coronary in the SCA – Studies unicêntricos and meta-analyses for the validation of the method, revealing its high performance, diagnostic, especially in its high negative predictive value, coupled with the absence of a protocol on the safe and effective risk stratification in the SCA without supradesnivelamento of ST in the risk groups low intermediate, studies have investigated the inclusion of TCCor in the diagnostic workup of the frames of chest pain acute in the emergency department. Meijboom and colleagues.12 evaluated 104 patients presenting with SCA without supradesnivelamento ST, classified as high (n = 71) and low risk (n = 33) according to clinical criteria, eletrocardiográficos and levels of markers of myocardial necrosis. Using the CATE as the standard of reference, the performance of the diagnostic use of TCCor in detecting lesions coronary artery with significant (stenosis > 50%) showed S = 100% (88/88, 95% CI 95 - 100), AND = 75% (12/16, 95% CI 47 - 92),PPV = 96% (88/92, 95% CI 89 - 99) and VPN = 100% (12/12, 95% CI 70 - 100), revealing the high sensitivity of TCCor in detecting stenosis coronary significant, both exclude the presence of DAC-significant in this group of patients with pre-test probability high of coronary heart disease. In the same vein, Hoffman and cols.13, in a cohort of 103 patients with chest pain acute in the emergency room, ECG and enzymes, cardiac normal, also found similar results to the above. Of the 103 patients, 14 were diagnosed with SCA (IAM without supradesnivelamento = 5) and unstable angina = 9), and the TCCor came to the diagnosis of stenosis significant in five patients diagnosed with AMI without supradesnivelamento ST. Three other patients were submitted to CATE for tests provocative ischemia, and positive, as well as the CATE, the TCCor proved to be accurate in excluding atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. In the remainder of the patients, the TCCor was able to exclude disease and, in this subgroup, during the period of follow-up, were not observed cardiac events larger. Furthermore, the presence of DAC in the angiotomografia coronary brought incremental value on the prediction of SCA using the traditional risk factors. In the study conducted by Rubinshtein and colleagues.14, a total of 58 patients, the diagnosis of SCA was confirmed in 20 patients, with the TCCor revealing injury to the coronary significant (stenosis > 50%) in 23 subjects, resulting in S = 100%, E = 92%, PPV = 87% and VPN = 100%. Of the other 35 patients, 15 showed no DAC, and the remaining 20 had coronary heart disease non obstructive. During the follow-up of 15 months, there was no death or myocardial infarction between the ages of 35 patients in whom the TCCor not revealed stenosis significant. In this way, the sensitivity of the TCCor to predict cardiovascular endpoints major (death, myocardial infarction or revascularization) during the period of hospitalization and in the follow-up of 15 months was 92%, AND = 76%, PPV = 52%, and VPN = 97%. In another study involving 586 patients with suspected SCA classified as at low risk by the score TIMI (Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction), the angiotomografia of the coronary arteries was performed promptly in 285 patients, and after 9horas in other 283 patients. In this scenario, the TCCor was able to exclude coronary heart disease significant in 476 (84%) subjects, being released with the safety and agility of the emergency department. None of these patients had death or myocardial non-fatal in up to 30 days of the completion of exame15. Researchers from the National University of Seul16 when randomizing 268 patients with chest pain acute realization of TCCor in MDCT with 64 detectors reduced the need for hospitalization in the group classified as intermediate risk for cad, as well as reduced the length of hospital stay. In the follow-up of 30 days, no patient in the group subjected to TCCor suffered heart disease event increased, while a patient in the strategy of a conventional victim of acute myocardial infarction. Goldstein and colleagues.17 have reached the same conclusions in another randomized study. In addition to evaluating the effectiveness of the diagnosis, this study evaluated the safety and efficiency of the method. The TCCor was able to delete and readily identify the coronary heart disease as a cause of chest pain in 75% of cases, including 67 patients with normal coronary and 8 patients with coronary artery disease important. With respect to security, compared to the standard protocol (Scintigraphy of Myocardial Perfusion [CPM]), the TCCor was as secure as the scintigraphy. In addition, the time to the diagnosis (3,4 h x 15 h) and costs ($ 1586 x$ 1872) were significantly lower in the group that used the TCCor (p < 0.001), revealing that the angiotomografia of coronary disease can confirm or rule out the DAC as the cause of chest pain acute in the emergency room so secure, effective and efficient. By the fact that many institutional protocols make use of the Treadmill Test (TE) advertiser risk in patients with chest pain acute, we evaluated the prognostic value of TCCor compared to TE. A total of 471 patients, 424 (90%) completed the follow-up of 2.6 years. A total of 44 cardiac events higher occurred in 30 patients (4 deaths cause cardiac, 6 WERE non-fatal, 23 cabg, and 11 episodes of unstable angina). The presence of DAC obstructive was associated with an event rate significantly higher when compared to the absence of DAC obstructive (6,8% versus 1.2%, p < 0,001). The results of the TE revealed an annual rate of events of 1.6%, when the normal of 1.9%, when the positive (with response to ischemic), and 4.6%, when the result inconclusive. A statistically significant increase in the overall analysis of risk was detected after adding the findings from the TCCor (Qui2, a 13.7 versus a 37.7, p < 0.001, respectively). The index increase for reclassification resulting (NRI, net reclassification index) of the patient was also evaluated, with a NRI of 54% with YOU (160 patients reclassified as more severe and 249 as more light), and NRI of 80% with the results of the TCCor (132 reclassified as more severe and 277 as lighter). With this, the findings of TCCor presented themselves as a strong predictor of future cardiac events, showing incremental value over clinical findings and test ergométrico18. The study ROMICAT19 revealed that in a population with low to intermediate risk for ACS with chest pain of acute, 50% showed lesions coronary artery to the TCCor. In this study, the TCCor presented a performance diagnostic of S = 100% AND = 54%, PPV = 17%, NPV = 100% for the evaluation of the presence of any atherosclerotic plaque, coronary. When examined in the presence of DAC obstructive (> 50% reduction in luminal), the sensitivity was 77%, AND = 87%, PPV = 35% and VPN = 98%. Both the presence of DAC, as the presence of stenosis significant, were able to predict SCA through the TCCor regardless of risk factors or the score TIMI. Through these findings, given the large number of patients with chest pain acute, the realization of TCCor early has improved substantially the therapeutic management in this group is to allow clinical decision-making early, driving more effective the treatment, or allowing the discharge safety and reducing hospital admissions unnecessary. These same researchers, after a period of two years of follow-up, published the results of the prognostic variables of the study, ROMICAT. Of the 368 patients, 333 (90,5%) completed the follow-up. Thirty-five events were observed in 25 (6,8%) patients (12 IAM and 23 cabg). The cumulative probability of outcomes with cardiac major (MACE) has increased according to the degree of coronary artery disease (no CAD = 0%, DAC non-obstructive = 4.6% and DAC obstructive = 30,3%, p < 0.0001), as well as to associate the level of the DAC to the dysfunction segment of the left ventricle (DSVE), as evidenced by MDCT (without stenosis or DSVE = 0,9%, found: DSVE = 15% or stenosis = increased 10.1%, both present = 62,4%, p < 0.0001). The test statistic C to predict MACE was 0,61 according to the score, TIMI, and increased to 0,84 adding the degree of the IPC by the TCCor and to 0,91 when added to the degree of DAC and DSVE. This study can conclude that among patients who present to the emergency with chest pain, acute low-to-intermediate risk for SCA in the absence of DAC by TCCor provides a period free of cardiac events for two years, while the presence of stenosis of the coronary with DSVE is associated with a high likelihood of MACE in the same período20. Similar results were found by Chow and colleagues.21 that have shown prognostic value and incremental severity of cad, ejection fraction of the left ventricle and the total load of the DAC when detected by the TCCor on the classic predictors of clinical. In a recent meta-analysis published in 2010, including 16 studies, some of which are cited here, with a total of 1.119 patients, showed S of 96% (95% CI, 93-98%), AND 92% (95% CI, 89-93%) and ROC curve of 0.98, demonstrating the high value of the angiotomografia of coronary for the diagnosis of stenosis of the coronary significant in the scenario of chest pain acute. However, S and e are related only to the test and not the practical use to estimate the probability of the disease in the individual scenario. The Likelihood-Ratio (VR), by its turn, is the chance that a positive test is a true positive and a negative test is a false negative. These last tests, therefore, provide a better understanding of the suspicion of the disease in question. A good diagnostic test, therefore, has the high RV for a positive test and a low RV to the negative test. The TCCor this analysis showed a RV positive 10,12 and RV negative 0.09. A value greater than 10 for RV positive provides strong evidence for confirmation of the diagnosis, is virtually conclusive. In the same vein, a very low value for RV is negative, as is 0.09, virtually excluded the possibility of the cause of the chest pain be due to coronary heart disease significativa22. The recent multicenter studies, and randomized in the SCA in the Face of the results obtained by the studies unicêntricos, trials multicenter and randomized trials were designed to confirm the previous results in a better level of evidence. With the publication of three trials multicenter: CT-STAT23, ACRIN PA24 and ROMICAT II25, which showed results consistent among themselves, the use of the angiotomografia of the coronary arteries in the setting of chest pain acute, applied to the suitable population, it reached the criterion for an indication class I with level of evidence A (Table 2). The study of Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain Patients to Treatment (CT-STAT) involved 16 centers and a total of 699 patients, of whom 361 were submitted to TCCor and 338 to the CPM. With the primary goal of efficiency, diagnosis (time to diagnosis), the patients in the group TCCor had a reduction of 54% in that time (2.9 h x 6.3 h, p < 0.0001) compared to the standard protocol with the CPM. The costs involved, and safety were secondary objectives. With respect to the costs, these also were lower among patients who used angiotomografia, with a reduction of 38% ($ 2.137 x $ 3.458, p < 0.0001). The strategies diagnostic did not differ in the rate of cardiac events increased by 0.8% versus 0.4 percent, p = 0.29) during the mean follow-up of six months. Therefore, this study showed that among patients with chest pain of acute low-risk use of TCCor resulted in an early diagnosis, at a lower cost than the CPM, and with the same degree of segurança23. The study ACRIN PA24 involved 1.370 risk patients low-to-intermediate in five centers in the United States, having as primary objective the safety profile (events after hospital discharge). This study showed that among the patients who underwent the TCCor, 640 (83%) had no DAC, which has allowed the hospital directly from the emergency department compared to the standard protocol (up 49.6% x 22.7%, 95% CI: for 21.4 to 32.2),resulting in a significant reduction in hospital length of stay (12,3 h vs. 24,7 h, p < 0.001). The primary outcome of safety was also fully demonstrated, as no patient with angiotomografia coronary negative presented a myocardial infarction or cardiac death within 30 days of completion of the examination. In this way, the diagnostic approach using the TCCor as the first imaging test in the emergency department in patients with low-risk to intermediate allowed to proceed to hospital discharge with safety after the negative test, increasing rates of medical discharge and reduction in length of stay hospitalar24. The most recent study, ROMICAT II25, had as a primary objective to access the hospital length of stay (from arrival in emergency until discharge), as this reflects clinical information (diagnosis and treatment) and cost issues, and logistics of the centres involved. Among the thousand patients involved, 501 were randomized to the group of TCCor, and 499 patients were randomized to the group of standard treatment, which consisted in following the protocols of chest pain specific routines of the institutions involved (markers of myocardial necrosis serials, ekg and other diagnostic test, which does not TCCor, or intervention in accordance with medical indication). Comparing the patients randomized to the group submitted to the care of the standard protocol, patients undergoing TCCor had a significant reduction of 7.6 h (p < 0.001) in the length of hospital stay. Within 8.6 h of arrival to emergency, 50% of the patients in the group TCCor had received hospital discharge compared to only 10% of the group's standard protocol. The time to reach a diagnosis, including in the subgroup with a final diagnosis of SCA was significantly lower in the group TCCor than in the group protocol the default (10,4 h x 18.7 h and 10.6 h x 18,8 h, respectively). In the same sense, during the follow-up period of 28 days, the rate of events (secondary objective) was infrequently. In the group of standard protocol there were six events, and in the group TCCor there were two events. These two events occurred in the group of TCCor, the ct examination accused lesion coronary significant (stenosis > 50%), but with investigation of functional negative, being chosen initially for clinical treatment. Critical analysis of multicenter studies of The scientific evidence outlined above provide subsidies for the indication of the use of TCCor in the evaluation of the patient with chest pain acute. Figures 1 and 2 show two cases of chest pain in the emergency room, being that in figure 1 we have a case with the adapter are bulky and stenosis critical proximal OF, and in figure 2 a case with the bridge (and only the discrete card mixed proximal to the bridge (which does not cause stenosis significant in the light of THE. Note that although clinical symptoms, age and presentation in the emergency room are similar, only the first patient benefited from being subjected to the catheterization. Therefore, the selection of the patient is a fundamental part for the good performance of the diagnostic and therapeutic success of the respective protocols for the evaluation of chest pain. In three multicentre studies, the included patients were around 50% female and a mean age of 50 years, which significantly reduces the pre-test probability in this population studied. Another important issue to be done is if there is in fact the need to undergo additional diagnoses prior to hospital discharge for low-risk patients. The rational for the holding of any examination is whether, when compared to a control group, this examination will result in improvement in outcomes. In the multicenter studies presented there was no evidence that the achievement of TCCor reduced the incidence of infarcts or deaths. In fact, the rate of cardiac events the largest among all the patients involved in the studies was very low, which makes it impossible to know if the TCCor brought some benefit. With respect to the costs, in study CT-STAT, the research protocol in which the angiotomografia revealed stenosis between 25% and 70% of the patients were subjected also to the CPM. Thus, there was more tests and costs in the group's TCCor, since injury between 25% and 49% are not considered significant, as shown by the results: of the 37 patients of group TCCor submitted CPM, 30 (81%) showed functional test normal. In the study, ROMICAT II, it is noteworthy that even in the face of a screening more efficient, this gain has not been reached under the risk of error diagnosis. In that study, there was no case registered in both groups, indicating that the greater number of high early emergency department with the use of the angiotomografia of coronary has not resulted in an error diagnostic, demonstrating the safety of the method. In the same study, however, the results showed that the patient subjected to TCCor generated the use of more resources, diagnoses, findings also described by Shreibati and colleagues.26, but not observed in study CT-STAT23. However, when considering the final costs, the average costs of the visit and index at the end of the follow-up of 28 days was similar in the group TCCor and in the group of standard protocol (p = 0.65). Therefore, protocols that make use of the angiotomografia of coronary heart as examination of the initial image in the management of patients with chest pain and acute possible the SCA, reduce the length of hospital stay, arrive at the diagnosis early, increasing the efficiency in making medical decision in the emergency room, without generating an increase in the total costs and no risk of discharge from hospital of patients with SCA (probability of less than 1% in the three multicentre trials). Angiotomografia of coronary disease and cost effectiveness Despite all the advantages demonstrated for a method to be incorporated within the routine of the diagnosis, it is essential that, in addition to the performance diagnostic, fine-tuning, is a method cost effective. In a recent multi-center study directed to the costs of health totals and related to the DAC in 8.235 low-risk patients undergoing TCCor and the CPM, the costs at the end of a year were up 25.9% lower in individuals submitted to TCCor compared to those who underwent CPM, with an average of $ 1.075 per paciente27. This difference occurred mainly due to less need for invasive procedure, and revascularization among patients undergoing angiotomografia of coronary. These findings extend to a similar study with 9.690 individuals of intermediate risk undergoing also the TCCor or CPM28. In a follow-up of nine months, the costs related to DAC were one-third lower for individuals undergoing TCCor, with an average of $ 467 per patient. The cost related to the medication, and the need for revascularization was similar between the groups, and the difference occurred by the need of additional diagnostic tests between patients undergoing CPM, especially CATE. In 2011, Miller and cols. added the TCCor to the standard protocol in the risk stratification of patients with chest pain acute in the emergency room and randomizaram resource utilization with the standard protocol. A total of 60 patients were involved in this study. The total resources used in the group of TCCor in up to 90 days of follow-up was $ 10.134 vs. $ 16.579 in the default group. With the use of this additional resource, in addition to the reduction of the total costs, there were fewer hospital readmissions (6/30 vs. 16/30, p = 0.007) and greater diagnostic power for cad (19 patients were diagnosed with chd, of which 18(95%) of the group of TCCor)29. Clinical impact of new evidence As almost about 10% of stress tests are inconclusive leading to the CATE, and if these show, in most of the times, negative, the study ACIC evaluated the correlation between the stress tests (CPM, TE, and stress echocardiography) with the TCCor, and compared the performance of the diagnostic with the CATE in 47 centres. A total of 6.198 patients, 1.548 (24,9%) had normal test, 1.027 (16,6%) were inconclusive and 3.623 (58,5%) were positive. In the multivariate analysis, the result of the stress test brought no incremental value on risk scores Framingham. The S, E, PPV and VPN overview of the stress testing was 60.4% of, by 34.2% to 59.3% and 35.2%, respectively. The performance diagnostic for stenosis > 50% of TCCor was S = 93,7%, AND = BE 37.9%, VPP = 70,6% and VPN = 79,1%. The association between the findings of the TCCor and CATE was statistically significant (OR: BY 9.1, CI 95%: 5,57 the 14,81, p < 0.001), while the results between the stress tests and CATE blanchett did not have the relationship (OR: 0,79, 95% CI: 0,56 to 1,11, p = 0,17). With this, the degree of stenosis in TCCor was the strongest predictor of additional injury to coronary significant in CATE, with the results of the stress test is not having incremental value over all variables in the clínicas30. In a recent publication of the registry CONFIRM, the use of TCCor was shown as a diagnostic tool cost-efficient in the investigation of the IPC. With about 15 thousand patients included, with 56.4% of the patients with chest pain typical and atypical, the rates of CATE were very low in the group of patients without DAC or DAC discrete detected by the TCCor, revealing that in real life doctors are accepting the results obtained by the TCCor, in this case, its high negative predictive value. Nevertheless, these same patients showed no increase in the rates of cardiac events the largest, reaffirming the security of the examination. In the same sense, of the patients who underwent angiography is invasive after the performance of TCCor, the rate of revascularization percutaneous was directly related to the degree of coronary artery disease detected by ct scan, jumping from 2% to 28,5% for those with disease discreet and disease obstructive, respectively, as well as for coronary artery bypass surgery. Thus, this record, which reflects the medical practice in real-life, it is clarified that the insertion of TCCor in the routine diagnostic does not translate to increased use of resources and, consequently, costs. On the contrary, there was a reduction in the procedures, especially in procedures of high cost, showing how the examination is highly effective and safe in the triage of patients in the investigation of disease aterosclerótica31. Conclusion In the setting of chest pain is acute, the use of angiotomografia of coronary heart in groups of low-to-intermediate risk reveals itself as a method of efficient, effective and safe, with prognostic value relevant, reducing costs and time of hospitalization, and optimizing treatment in emergency rooms. Contribution of authors Conception and design of the research and Writing of the manuscript: dos Prazeres CEE, Cury RC, Carneiro ACC, Rochitte CE; data Retrieval and statistical Analysis: dos Prazeres CEE, Rochitte CE; Analysis and interpretation of data: dos Prazeres CEE, Carneiro ACC, Rochitte CE; critical Revision of the manuscript regarding intellectual content: Cury RC, Carneiro ACC, Rochitte CE. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 