SUMMARY The foreign body aspiration (FBA) into the respiratory tract is a common issue among children, especially under three years of age. In the initial radiographic evaluation, about 30% of patients have normal chest X-ray. The CT with virtual bronchoscopy (VB) can help in the early diagnosis of this framework and its early management. The definitive treatment is to remove the foreign body through rigid bronchoscopy under general anesthesia. The aim of this study was to describe the use of BV in two patients with suspected FBA approach and conduct a literature review on this topic. Both patients had sudden onset of respiratory symptoms and coughing or choking with food predating the picture. Patients underwent BV, and the presence of endobronchial foreign body in both cases was detected with subsequent removal by conventional rigid bronchoscopy in a case. BV is a recent non-invasive method and with potential to detect the presence of a foreign body in the respiratory tract in children. In selected cases, BV can indicate the exact location of the foreign body and even avoid rigid bronchoscopy procedure in the absence of the foreign body. Key words: Bronchoscopy; Pediatrics; Respiratory aspiration.     Introduction to the foreign body aspiration (FBA) in the respiratory tract is a common and serious cause of respiratory distress and in pediatric emergencies and appointments, especially in patients under 3 years of age.(1.2) Cyanosis, cough and sudden onset wheezing are major symptoms described for this condition.(2) However, in other situations, there is a paucity of clinical signs, due to spontaneous patient improvement or no reports of suffocation or choking events by the family. The radiological manifestation depends on the size, location and nature of the absorbed foreign body (FB). Chest X-rays can demonstrate from an unspecific infiltrate, atelectasis, areas of unilateral or bilateral hyperinflation or even parenchymal consolidations and bronchiectasis.(3) The vast majority of EC is not radiopaque, and about a third of the addmitted children have radiologically normal chest.(4.5) The FBA may result in serious respiratory sequelae such as recurrent pulmonary infections, bronchiectasis and previously healthy lung parenchyma destruction. Thus, diagnosis and early intervention are the key to a better management of this condition.(6) The definitive treatment is done through bronchoscopy, invasive procedure, although simple, it is not absent of complications and risks. Virtual bronchoscopy (BV) is a relatively new, non-invasive procedure, which provides a three-dimensional view of the inner walls of the tracheobronchial tree through the reconstruction of axial images. The aim of this study is to describe the use of BV technique with CT multi-detector (MDCT) low dose in two pediatric patients with suspected FBA, and perform a systematic review on the subject, taking as data source the searching systems as PubMed and SciELO, and national literature concerning the subject.   Case reports The  used device for carrying out the tests was a 64-channel multi-detector CT scanner (SOMATOM Sensation 64, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) equipped with Care Dose 4D, a device that modulates the radiation emitted according to the thickness of the studied tissue. The thickness of the cuts was of 1 mm, with a pitch of 1.4; The radiographic adjust was of 120 kVp, 45 mA and the time of exposure was of 3.53 seconds. Patients were sedated with chloral hydrate at 15%, in a dose of 50 mg/kg. The rigid bronchoscope used for EC removal of one patient (Case 1) was 3.5 mm in diameter (Karl Storz Instruments, Tuttlingen, Germany), and the child was sedated with propofol during the procedure. Case 1 Male patient, aged 17 months, was assisted on the pediatric emergency with respiratory distress symptoms after choking during meal 30 min before the consultation. Previously healthy child, with no history of asthma or fever. The physical examination shows that he was in good general condition, pulse oximetry in 96% in room air, mild subcostal drawing, tachypnea (respiratory rate = 46 breaths / min) and auscultation with diffuse wheezing, inspiratory and expiratory. The chest X-ray showed interstitial infiltrate in right hilar region. The BV demonstrated normal trachea and bronchial sources. However, we visualized complete obstruction of the average light bronchus (Figures 1 and 2). The underlying lung parenchyma was normal. The patient was submitted to a rigid bronchoscopy with organic removal of FB (grain of rice) and subsequent bronchial hygiene, uneventfully.         Case 2 Female patient, aged 14 months, was referred to the emergency with wheezing report for 2 months after ingestion of a peanut offered by the mother. The patient had used oral corticosteroids on three occasions, each time for seven days associated with bronchodilators by nebulization. At the examination, she was in a good general condition, oxygen saturation at 97% in environment air, cushingoid facies, eupneic, pulmonary auscultation with wheezing located in the right hemithorax and the rest of the segmental examination without alterations. The chest X-ray showed hyperinflation of the right lung without consolidation or pleural effusion. The trachea and bronchi BV showed normal bilateral sources. However, the topography of the right main bronchus, right after the carina, showed the presence of a defined image of irregular borders obliterating the bronchial lumen (Figure 3). The patient was not submitted to rigid bronchoscopy, since the responsible in charge did not authorize it, even after recognizing the future risk of respiratory complications.     Discussion FBA is a major cause of respiratory distress in children mainly aged between 6 and 24 months. Faced with a patient suspected of having this condition, after the research of history and conducting thorough clinical examination, radiological evaluation is the first step of the investigation. The most common radiographic findings are air trapping, atelectasis and shadows EC radiopaque.(7,8) However, these findings are very unspecific and of low accuracy. Some authors have reported sensitivity of 68% and the specificity of 67% for the chest X-ray in the diagnosis of patients with suspected FBA.(3) In a study with similar characteristics, it demonstrated sensitivity 85% and specificity of 68%.(2) In other studies, we came to the conclusion that the absence of radiological findings do not exclude the diagnosis of FBA.(9,10) To increase the radiological accuracy pictures of inhalation and exhalation, decubitus and lateral fluoroscopy can be conducted.(8) However, one can not avoid the conventional bronchoscopy based solely on these findings, especially in patients with high index of suspicion for this condition. In the cases described here, it was possible to identify the presence of EC in the tracheobronchial tree of patients through the use of BV with MDCT. Both images in the axial plane as created by formatting were diagnosed  FBA. Rigid bronchoscopy remains the gold standard for the diagnosis and for the EC to withdraw the respiratory tract, but it is an invasive procedure that requires general anesthesia and can cause complications.(11,12) The mode of BV with MDCT is an imaging method capable of identifying the presence of EC and associated parenchymal changes. The greatest advantages over conventional tomography are the increased in performing the examination speed and the possibility of finer cuts, with better spatial resolution for 3D reconstruction.(13,14) However, the main disadvantage of this procedure is the exposure to radiation, which can be minimized by avoiding the abusive use of CT scans and by reducing to as little as possible the tube current (in mA), as well as the need for the patient's sedation. Usually, the minimum acceptable limit for a good quality image is located at 30 mA and 80 kVp. Some authors investigated the use of BV in pediatric patients with suspected FBA and concluded that it can correctly locate the EC position in the respiratory tree.(8) Although in this study, it was demonstrated that when BV is normal with no evidence of endobronchial obstruction, the use of conventional bronchoscopy was not superior in providing relevant information. In another study, when comparing the images obtained by BV and conventional bronchoscopy in patients with suspected FBA, the results were similar.(2) In a recent study comparing VB and conventional bronchoscopy, a sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 58% were estimated.(12) Other authors have recently published a study comparing VB and rigid bronchoscopy in patients with suspected FBA, (15) suggesting that the use of this new technique can shorten the time until the completion of bronchoscopy and locate precisely the EC. Although not remove CE, you can provide the precise location of the same and being useful in the preparation prior to removal by the EC rigid device. One possible disadvantage with the use of BV are the false-positive tests. The presence of purulent endobronchial secretion or protrusion of tumor mass towards the bronchial lumen should be discarded.(8) In a recent review, the importance of developing emergency respiratory endoscopy centers was stressed, in order to optimize the treatment of patients suspected of having this condition.(16) In conclusion, the BV can be used as a research method in children with suspected FBA. The correct location of the EC, the ability to view the associated pulmonary parenchyma and the possibility of conducting the examination without anesthesia makes this method viable for this condition. This study demonstrated the use of this new method in two cases with different evolutions. Furthermore, one can avoid the use of the conventional bronchoscopy under general anesthesia where VB does not show the presence of EC in air.   