 ABSTRACT aspiration of foreign body (ACE) for the respiratory tract is a common problem in pediatric patients, especially below three years of age. In the radiological assessments the initial, approximately 30% of patients show x-ray findings of normal chest. The ct with bronchoscopy virtual (BV) can assist in the early diagnosis of this box and its ready handling. The definitive treatment is with the removal of the foreign body through bronchoscopy rigid and subject to general anesthesia. The objective of this work was to describe the use of the BV approach in two patients with suspected ACE and to conduct a review of the literature on this topic. The two patients had sudden onset of respiratory symptoms and report of cough or choking with food prepended to the frame. The patients were submitted to BV, and was detected by the presence of foreign body endobrônquico in both cases, with subsequent removal by bronchoscopy rigid conventional in a case. The BV is a non-invasive method recently and with the potential to detect the presence of foreign body in the respiratory tract in children. In selected cases, BV can assist in correct location of the foreign body and even avoid the procedure of bronchoscopy rigid in the absence of foreign body. Keywords: Bronchoscopy; Pediatrics; Aspiration respiratory. Introduction aspiration of foreign body (ACE) in the respiratory tract is a frequent cause and a serious respiratory distress and consultation in emergencies of pediatrics, especially in patients below 3 years of age. (1,2) Cyanosis, cough and wheezing of sudden onset are the main symptoms described in this condition. (2) however, in other situations, there is a paucity of clinical signs, by improving the spontaneous from the patient or the patient not be reporting the event of choking or gagging by the family. The manifestation of the radiation depends on the size, location and nature of the foreign body (EC) is aspirated. The x-ray findings of the chest can demonstrate from an inflammatory non-specific, atelectasis, areas of hyperinflation unilateral or bilateral, and even consolidations parenchymal, and bronchiectasis. (3) The vast majority of EC is not radiopaque, and approximately one-third of the children admitted have radiologic exam of the chest normal. (4,5) THE ACE may result in sequelae respiratory serious, such as recurrent chest infection, bronchiectasis and destruction of lung parenchyma previously healthy. In this way, the early diagnosis and intervention are fundamental for a better management of this condition. (6) The definitive treatment is done through bronchoscopy, invasive procedure that, although simple, is not without complications and risks. Bronchoscopy-virtual (BV) is a relatively new procedure, non-invasive, which provides a three-dimensional view of the internal walls of the tree tracheobronchial through the reconstruction of images in axial. The objective of this work is to describe the use of the technique of BV associated with the CT multi-detector (MDCT) low-dose at two pediatric patients with suspected ACE, as well as to conduct a systematic review on the subject, taking as data source the search systems PubMed and SciELO, in addition to the national literature concerning the topic. Report of cases The instrument used for the tests was a ct scanner multi-detector 64 channels (SOMATOM Sensation 64; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany), equipped with Care Dose 4D, a device that modulates the radiation emitted according to the thickness of the tissue studied. The thickness of the slices was 1 mm, with the step table (pitch) of 1.4; the regime radiographic was 120 kVp, 45 mA, and exposure time of 3,53 s. The patients were sedated with chloral hydrate 15%, at a dose of 50 mg/kg. The bronchoscope used hard for the removal of the EC of one of the patients (see Case 1) was 3.5 mm in diameter (Karl Storz Instruments, Tuttlingen, Germany), and the child was sedated with propofol during the procedure. Case 1 Patient female, aged 17 months, was met in the emergency pediatric frame with difficulty breathing after choking during a meal 30 min before the appointment. The child, previously healthy, with no history of asthma or fever. On physical examination, he was in good general condition, pulse oximetry 96% on room air, circulation subcostal light, taquipneico (respiratory rate = 46 cycles/min) and chest auscultation with wheezing diffuse, inspiratory and expiratory. The x-ray findings of the chest showed infiltrate in the interstitial region hilar right. The BV showed the trachea and bronchi normal sources. However, it is envisaged a complete obstruction of the light of the brônquio medium (Figures 1 and 2). The parenchyma underlying lung was normal. The patient was submitted to bronchoscopy, rigid with the withdrawal of the EC organic (grain of rice) and the subsequent bronchial hygiene local, uneventful. Case 2 female, aged 14 months, to be forwarded to emergency with a report of wheezing for 2 months after the ingestion of peanuts offered by the mother. The patient had used corticosteroid, oral on three occasions, each time for seven days, associated with bronchodilator by nebulization. On examination, he was in good general condition, oxygen saturation 97% in ambient air, facies cushingoide, eupneica, chest auscultation with wheezing located in hemitórax right and the rest of the examination target without changes. The x-ray findings of the chest showed hyperinflation of the right lung, with no consolidations or pleural effusions. The BV showed the trachea and bronchi fonts normal bilaterally. However, on the topography of brônquio source right, just after the carina, was evident the presence of image-defined edges and irregular obliterando the light bronchial (Figure 3). The patient underwent bronchoscopy rigid, as that person has not authorized the same, the same guidance about the future risks of respiratory complications. Discussion THE ACE is an important cause of respiratory difficulty in infants mostly in the age group between 6 and 24 months. Front of a patient with suspicion of this condition, after the survey of the history and performing clinical examination, fine-grained, the radiological assessments is the first step of the research. The findings radiographic the most common are trapping air, atelectasis and shadows by EC radiopacos. (7,8) However, these findings are very nonspecific and of low accuracy. Some authors have described a sensitivity of 68% and a specificity of 67% for the x-ray findings of the chest in the diagnosis of patients with suspected ACE. (3) In a study with similar characteristics, it has been demonstrated that the sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 68%. (2) In other studies, the conclusion was reached that the absence of radiological abnormalities does not exclude the diagnosis of ACE. (9,10) To increase the accuracy of the radiation can be performed images in inspiration and expiration, recumbency and lateral fluoroscopy. (8) However, one can not avoid the bronchoscopy conventional based solely on these findings, especially in patients with a high index of suspicion for such a condition. In the cases here described, it was possible to identify the presence of EC in the tree tracheobronchial of patients through the use of BV with MDCT. Both the images in the plane axial such as those created by formatting were diagnostic of ACE. Bronchoscopy, rigid remains as the gold standard for the diagnosis and for the removal of EC in the respiratory tract, but it is an invasive procedure that requires general anesthesia, and that can lead to complications. (11,12) The modality of BV with MDCT is a method of image capable of identifying the presence of EC and parenchymal abnormalities associated with it. Its major advantages over conventional tomography are the increase in the speed of completion of the examination and the possibility of more cuts fine, with better spatial resolution for the 3D reconstruction. (13,14) However, the main disadvantage of this procedure is the exposure to radiation, which can be minimized, avoiding the abusive use of tomographies and reducing to a minimum the tube current (in mA), as well as the need for sedation of the patient. Usually the minimum acceptable for a good quality image is located at 30 mA and 80 kVp. Some authors have investigated the use of BV in pediatric patients with suspected ACE and concluded that the same can correctly locate the position of the EC on the tree breathing. (8) Yet in this study, it was demonstrated that when the BV is normal, without evidence of obstruction endobrônquica, the use of bronchoscopy conventional was not found to be superior in bringing additional relevant information. In another study, when they compared the images obtained through the BV, and bronchoscopy conventional in patients with suspected ACE, found similar results. (2) In a recent study comparing BV and bronchoscopy conventional, it has been estimated sensitivity of 96% and a specificity of 58%. (12) Other authors have recently published a study comparing the BV with bronchoscopy, rigid in patients with suspected ACE,(15), suggesting that the use of this new technique can shorten the time until the completion of the bronchoscopy and locate accurately the EC. Although it does not remove the CE, BV can provide the precise location of the same, and to be useful in the preparation prior to removal of the EC device hard. A possible disadvantage with the use of the BV are the tests false-positive. The presence of secretion endobrônquica purulent or protrusion of any bulk of the tumour in the direction of the light bronchial should be discarded. (8) In a recent review, it was highlighted the importance of the development of centres of endoscopy in respiratory emergency to optimize the treatment of patients suspected of this condition. (16) in Conclusion, the BV can be used as a method of investigation in children with suspected ACE. The correct location of the EC, the possibility of viewing the lung parenchyma associated with, and the possibility of performing the examination without anaesthesia make this method feasible for this condition. This work has demonstrated the use of this new method in two cases with different evolutions. In addition, you can prevent the realization of bronchoscopy with conventional general anesthesia in cases in which BV did not show the presence of CE in the air. 