 SUMMARY Computed Tomography (HRCT) is the radiological imaging technique that reflects more closely the changes in lung structure. Various HRCT findings can be combined to form typical patterns. These, together with the anatomical distribution of the findings and with the clinical data, can narrow the diagnosis of diffuse interstitial lung diseases, and, in many cases, suggest the correct diagnosis with a high level of accuracy. The most common patterns of diffuse pulmonary interstitial diseases in HRCT are nodular, linear/reticular, cystic lesions, ground-glass opacities, and consolidations. This article reviews the correlations between HRCT patterns and pathologic findings, summarizing the most common causes and methods of the research, in order to reach a diagnosis of the most common chronic diffuse lung diseases. Keywords: Interstitial lung diseases / pathology; computed tomography X-ray; Diagnostic techniques respiratory system. Introduction The computed Tomography (HRCT) is a critical tool for the evaluation of lung disease. Since HRCT provides a global anatomic assessment of the lungs, this imaging technique significantly improves the sensitivity and specificity of the clinical and histopathological diagnosis. The TCAR is particularly useful in the evaluation of diffuse interstitial lung disease (DILD), as there may be a significant overlap of clinical presentations and histopathologic patterns, and well as a significant heterogeneity of the lung diseases. These modalities together provide a clinical approach, radiological and histopathological to the DILD's patient, allowing that way an accurate diagnosis and optimal management. Using fine techniques and cuts high-resolution reconstruction, HRCT can detect various abnormalities of up to 0.3 mm. While this resolution is significantly less than the one of the pathological examination (eg., the typical objective of the lower resolution microscope has a 1 cm field diameter), HRCT does not allow the visualization of abnormalities in the secondary pulmonary lobule level. In this review, we present the key HRCT to DILD standards, providing the clinical context and histopathological correlations for each pathern. Technique There are several protocols in current use for obtaining HRCT images. Table 1 shows examples of two of these protocols: spaced axial images and HRCT volumetric multidetector. Axial images have the advantage of having a slightly better resolution, and this technique has low radiation dosage. Volumetric imaging allows the evaluation of the entire lung. In general, images are obtained with the patient in the dorsal and ventral decubitus. In normal patients, dependent opacities are usually seen in the posterior and subpleural regions of the lung. For some diffuse lung diseases such as nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), images can be identical to those seen in normal patients. Pone images will differentiate between these two possibilities, since normal dependent density in the posterior lung will disappear on prone images, whereas true lung disease-related density will remain.

 Dynamic expiratory images are also obtained to screen for air trapping. A standards-based approach for diagnosis: There are four general patterns of HRCT abnormalities that are key to its interpretation: 1) reticular opacities; 2) nodes; 3) increased lung opacity; and 4) decreased lung opacity. Within each of these patterns, other aspects of the images can help to narrow the differential diagnosis, such as the distribution of abnormalities in the axial and coronal planes, as well as the co-occurrence/pattern overlapping. Our purpose in this article is to describe these basic standards HRCT, making important clinical and histopathologic correlations. For the interested reader, histopathological findings are presented in detail. (1) Standard 1. Reticular opacities Th thickening of the interstitial connective tissue network of the lung will result in reticular opacities of varying morphology. This thickening may be due to cell infiltration / or liquid deposition of fibrous tissue. Reticular opacities can be divided into interlobular septa thickening, reticulation associated with the traction of bronchiectasia and honeycombing. Interlobular septa thickening. Thickening of the interlobular septa (Figure 1) is defined as the thickening of the interstitium that surrounds and delineates the secondary pulmonary lobule.  Septal lines tend to be straight and 1-2 cm in length.  The centrilobular artery, which lies in the center of the pulmonary lobule, is often visible.  A few interlobular septa are often seen in normal patients. 
 In abnormal patients, however, many will be seen, outlining the polygonal lobules. It is important to emphasize that the septal thickening occurs in a wide variety of diseases. This finding is more useful when the main abnormality, when the differential diagnosis is limited and dependent on the type of thickening: flat, nodular or irregular (Table 2). The clinical context, in particular the information concerning the duration of clinical symptoms and the disease progress time, is extremely useful in the interpretation of the thickening of the interlobular septa. Predominant reticular Opacities 
Clinical and histopathological correlations Pulmonary edema Although HRCT is not usually necessary for the diagnosis of pulmonary edema, it can be performed when there is a discrepancy between the clinical history and findings on chest x-ray. In the absence of an enlarged cardiac silhouette, the echocardiography can reveal diastolic dysfunctions such as mitral regurgitation, left atrial enlargement and high pulmonary artery pressure. Cerebral natriuretic peptide levels may also be high. (2) To rule out myocardial infarction, which can be asymptomatic cardiac enzyme levels should be determined and an electrocardiography should be performed. High creatinine levels may indicate kidney failure as underlying disease, another cause of pulmonary edema. Figure 2 shows an example of pulmonary edema from lung biopsy. Disseminated lymphangitis Metastases of lung lymphangitis may also result from pulmonary and extra-pulmonary tumors. Common extra-thoracic sources include breast, stomach, pancreas and prostate. (3) When lymphangitic metastases originate from a primary lung tumor, metastases are often one-sided, with the view of a lump or mass. (4) In the presence of a known primary tumor, typical HRCT findings can be considered diagnostic.  In the absence of a known primary tumor, the diagnosis requires cellular or tissue confirmation (bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL], pleural fluid collection, transbronchial biopsy, or surgical lung biopsy). (5) Because such tumors are typically distributed among the lymphatics bronchovascular bundles, biopsy by fiberoptic bronchoscopy is a highly effective method (Figure 3). Sarcoidosis The diagnosis of sarcoidosis granulomas requires a finding of non-necrotizing biopsy, together with clinical and radiological findings that are consistent with the disease. It is very important to rule out other causes of granulomatous diseases (especially tuberculosis). (6) The places for the biopsies should be the easiest to access, such as the skin and superficial lymph nodes. In some cases, fiberoptic bronchoscopy with bronchial and transbronchial biopsies is required, and, as a last resort, mediastinoscopy or surgical lung biopsy can be performed. 
  Nodules are the hallmark of pulmonary sarcoidosis, being seen in ≈90% of all cases. 
 Such nodules are widely distributed but tend to focus around bronchovascular, pleura and interlobular septa structures. (7) The transbronchial biopsy is highly effective in confirming the diagnosis (Figure 4). The hilar lymphadenopathy is an expected finding, and there may be a confluence of nodules within larger parenchymal opacities. In the late stages of the disease, there may be the presence of fibrosis, manifested by irregular reticulation, traction bronchiectasis, and confluent masses of fibrotic tissue. Erdheim-Chester Disease Erdheim-Chester disease is a rare systemic histiocytosis that typically affects the long bones, with lung involvement in 15% of cases. (8) The disease is now recognized as a distinct condition of systemic forms of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). The diagnosis of Erdheim-Chester disease in male patients over 40 years of age presenting diffuse bone pain and DIPD should be considered. In such cases, one must discard the diagnosis of metastatic carcinoma. In patients with Erdheim-Chester disease, pulmonary involvement is suggested by the presence of symmetrical reticular shadows on chest X-rays, interlobular septal thickening (on chest X-rays and CT scans), centrilobular nodular opacities, ground-glass opacities, and fissural thickening. The pathology is different, showing mild fibrosis in pleura and along the lymphatic vessels of the interlobular septa. Unlike that observed in patients with HCL histiocytes of patients with Erdheim-Chester disease are immunohistochemically negative for CD1a and S100 protein but positive for CD68. Lymphoid pulmonary lesions Lymphoid pulmonary lesions constitute a general category of disease that includes follicular bronchiolitis, nodular lymphoid hyperplasia, lymphoid interstitial pneumonia, and low grade lymphoma. (9) In rare cases, lymphoid hyperplasia can simulate sarcoidosis, since the engagement is concentrated along the septa, in subpleural areas and around the airways (all places of lymph channels in the lung). Traction bronchiectasis Bronchial dilatation occurring as a consequence of interstitial fibrosis is referred to as traction bronchiectasis (Figure 5). The bronchi are generally irregular appearance (corkscrew) and are not associated with evidence of bronchial inflammation (gross thickening of the bronchial wall or mucoid impaction). Traction bronchiectasis is usually accompanied by other signs of pulmonary fibrosis (honeycombing or irregular reticulation). While traction bronchiectasis is quite specific for fibrosis, the differential diagnosis is broader than that of honeycombing. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is commonly associated with traction bronchiectasis. However, in the absence of honeycombing, other diseases are more likely (Chart 3)

 In patients with a history of collagen vascular disease, bronchiectasis bibasal and peripheral traction, together with ground-glass attenuation, it can be considered as a diagnosis of NSIP. When the circumstances are less diagnostic, a surgical biopsy may be necessary. Honeycombing lung remodeling honeycomb (honeycombing) reflects the end stage of a number of diseases that cause parenchymal destruction. It has a characteristic pattern on HRCT, with subpleural cysts with thick walls that share walls and, when advanced, are often stacked in multiple layers (Figure 6). It is typically accompanied by other signs of fibrosis (traction bronchiectasis and reticulation).

  Honeycombing is highly suggestive of a pathologic diagnosis of usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), although it can be attributed to other diseases (Chart 3). Honeycombing seen on HRCT is usually considered diagnostic of UIP in patients with appropriate clinical profile. Most of these patients don't require a surgical lung biopsy. As the bilateral honeycombing on HRCT diagnosis is considered under these conditions, it is vitally important for the radiologist to be sure that honeycombing is truly present before describing it. Clinical and histopathological correlations Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis A finding of UIP surgical lung biopsy is characteristic of IPF, which is chronic idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The histopathology of UIP alternating destructive fibrosis and normal lung in the surgical biopsy specimen (Figures 7 and 8). An edge feature of focal lesion advancing is always present and is known as "fibroblastic foci." Clinical diagnostic criteria for UIP were proposed by a consensus of the American Thoracic Society and the European Respiratory Society in 2000. (10) Since then, the following became apparent: • The presence of honeycombing is required for a reliable diagnosis from HRCT (ie, reticular abnormalities with minimal ground-glass are not enough). (11) • The transbronchial biopsy is rarely indicated in the diagnostic workup of suspected cases. (12) • The disease is uncommon in patients who are younger than 50 years old. (13) • Asymptomatic patients may have the disease. Based on these observations, the criteria for the clinical diagnosis of IPF should include all of the following aspects: • Age > 50 • exclusion of other potential causes of interstitial lung disease (ILD), such as significant environmental or occupational exposure, drug use fibrogenic and collagen vascular diseases. • abnormal results in lung function testing including restriction of evidence, compromised gas exchange (at rest or under stress) or diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO, carbon monoxide diffusing capacity) reduced • crackles inspiratory bibasilar • findings HRCT of bibasilar reticular abnormalities with honeycombing and absence of findings suggestive of other diseases (eg., air trapping, centrilobular nodules and opacities in large frosted glass) The specificity of these findings is approximately 90% for IPF. (14) Collagen vascular diseases All rheumatic diseases can produce pulmonary fibrosis. Rheumatoid arthritis and scleroderma are predominately implicated in cases where a UIP HRCT pattern is seen, and with similar functional abnormalities.
 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis to inhaled antigens organic hypersensitivity reactions encompass a group of diffuse lung disease mediated immune reactions and caused by repeated inhalation of a wide variety of organic dusts, bioaerosols and chemical compounds. These diseases are collectively classified as hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). Continued exposure to such antigens typically occurs at home. In Brazil, it is particularly associated with poultry and large indoor mold concentrations. (15) In chronic HP, findings in HRCT indicative of fibrosis are present and associated with a worse prognosis. Honeycombing is common in chronic forms. In a study conducted in Brazil, honeycombing was present in 48 (57%) of 85 patients who underwent surgical lung biopsy. (16) The disease was restricted to the upper lobes in only 11 cases. However, when there was involvement of the lower lobes, other findings suggestive of PH, such as centrilobular nodules, decreased attenuation areas, areas of ground-glass opacities and peribronchial distribution of lesions were commonly present. In biopsy samples, that is translated as chronic inflammatory interstitial infiltration, concentrated around the airways and often accompanied by chronic bronchiolitis and small granulomas nonnecrotizing interstitials. In only 6% of the cases, CT revealed peripheral distribution of honeycombing, mimicking UIP. None of the patients had similar injuries to UIP in lung biopsies. These findings are similar to other studies. (17,18) In patients with fibrosing lung disease who are exposed to PH provoking antigens, a clinical diagnosis may be accepted, provided that the CT context is appropriate and LBA cytology reveals lymphocytosis. (19) fibrosing sarcoidosis (stage IV) advanced fibrosis (stage IV) in sarcoidosis (sarcoidosis, fibrosing) is found in less than 10% of the cases. The fibrosing sarcoidosis occurs predominantly in the upper lung regions in central / dorsal distribution with bronchial distortion and the fissures. Conglomerate hilar-perihilar are common. Septal lines, bronchovascular thickening micronodules and adenopathy (sometimes calcified) can be observed. When there honeycombing, it is peripheral and involves the upper lung zones. (20) A simulating pattern UIP is very rare and, in this situation, there may be fewer granulomas than in the early stages of the disease. The histopathological confirmation of sarcoidosis may be obtained through bronchial or transbronchial biopsy (positive in 60-80%) (20,21) biopsies from other places or, rarely, surgical lung biopsy. Non-specific interstitial pneumonia Originally described in 1994 by Katzenstein and Fiorelli, (22) NSIP was introduced as a new form of idiopathic DRI, separate and distinct from those proposed in the original Leibow classification. (23) An inflammatory DIPD characterized by temporal uniformity of the disease process, NSIP presents varying degrees of interstitial inflammation and fibrosis. It is purely a rare inflammatory disease. The prognosis is better in cases of NSIP than in UIP. NSIP patients tend to be younger than patients with IPF (average age, 53 vs. 67 years). Most cases occur in the context of an underlying disease, such as connective tissue disease, drug-induced lung disease or chronic PH. (24) Histopathologic NSIP pattern is the predominant pattern seen in most rheumatic diseases, especially systemic sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, polymyositis / dermatomyositis and disease undifferentiated connective tissue; the latter has been described as a new distinct entity. (25) The NSIP pattern is a common presentation of PH. (26) However, in such cases, the distribution on HRCT is quite different from that of the PINE associated collagen vascular disease or drug reaction. Differentiation of HRCT is particularly useful due to the typical histological findings of PH, such as granulomas, giant cells and interstitial bronchiolocentric pneumonia, are absent by definition. Several HRCT features suggest a diagnosis of NSIP. (27) Although UIP presents the same subpleural and basilar predominance, ground-glass opacities, which are rarely seen in UIP, they are found in over 75% of cases of NSIP. Reticular abnormalities, with or without traction bronchiectasis, are common and appear to correlate with the amount of fibrosis observed in the histopathological test. In the axial plane, the subpleural preservation (a thin lung edge preserved in pleuroparenchymal interface) and tracking of opacities along bronchovascular bundles of the lower zones are two findings that correlate with histopathological findings of NSIP. Honeycombing is rare in NSIP cases, and it is discussed whether this should be a finding for exclusion. In the original sample of 64 patients described by Katzenstein and Fiorelli, the mortality was low and there was no microscopic honeycombing in any patient. (22) In a later study conducted by Travis et al., (28) patients with microscopic honeycombing were included, and survival decreased significantly. Subsequently to these clinical studies, reported occurrence of honeycombing on CT in patients with NSIP has been variable, ranging between 0% and 30% (average, 20%). (29-34) In contrast, extensive honeycombing is much more common manifestation of UIP. (35) The findings described above for NSIP are nonspecific. Therefore, in the absence of definition for collagen vascular disease or exposure to fibrogenic drugs, surgical lung biopsy is needed. Some cases of desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP), HP (with or without classical histological findings) and several less common diseases can also produce this pattern. Drug-induced lung disease, due to drug toxicity, can result in DILD with histopathologic reactions ranging from acute injury to fibrotic similar standards of the UIP. (36) The mechanism of lung injury induced by drugs range between cytotoxicity and hypersensitivity reactions. A wide variety of treatment-related reactions have been described as a consequence of chemotherapeutic agents (bleomycin, busulfan, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, 1,3-bis (2-chloroethyl) -1-Nitrosourea and 1- (2-chloroethyl) - 3-cyclohexyl-1-Nitrosourea), statins, amiodarone, nitrofurantoin, methotrexate and thoracic radiotherapy. It is usually necessary to perform bronchoscopy with bronchial biopsy to rule out infection. The surgical lung biopsy is not specific for a particular drug in most cases. (37) Asbestosis Asbestosis is pneumoconiosis caused by inhalation of asbestos fibers and is characterized by slow progression of pulmonary fibrosis. In the early stages of the disease, an irregular reticular pattern is typical HRCT finding, whereas a cystic pattern is characteristic of advanced stage. Asbestosis affects workers involved in the extraction of minerals as well as those working in manufacturing and installation of products containing asbestos (industrial textiles, insulation and manufactured goods of cement). Interstitial fibrosis related to asbestosis varies in appearance. In some cases, fibrosis is histopathologically indistinguishable from UIP, (38), although in most cases, asbestosis is a fibrotic lung disease associated with airways and not the typical peripheral lobular accentuation of the UIP. Parenchymal bands are most commonly resulting from asbestosis. Asbestosis can be diagnosed without lung biopsy in the presence of three clinical signs (a restrictive pattern of lung disease, DLCO below the lower limit of normal and bilateral fine crackles in the posterior lung base) in combination with irregular opacities (in chest radiograph or HRCT) and relevant exposure history. (39) A diagnosis of asbestosis can also be made based on the co-occurrence of ILD and of typical pleural plaques on CT. A finding of asbestos fragments in the liquid obtained by LBA is highly specific. (40) Standard 2. Nodules There are several ways to classify nodules: well-defined vs. poorly defined; distribution in the upper lobes vs. lower; and its relationship with secondary pulmonary lobes. This last is the most useful feature, since it provides a focused differential diagnosis and reflects the physiopathology of the underlying disease. There are three possible HRCT distributions of nodules: perilymphatic, random, and centrilobular (Tables 4, 5 and 6). Perilymphatic nodules Clinical and histopathological correlations Perilymphatic nodules are characterized by their distribution in Bronchovascular sheath, pleura and interlobular septa, corresponding to the lymphatic pathways in the lung (Figure 9). All conditions in this category necessarily have an affinity for lymphatic channels. Granulomatous sarcoidosis Sarcoidosis is a noninfectious granulomatous disease of likely immune origin. The distribution of nodular granulomas along the lymphatic vessels is virtually diagnostic of sarcoidosis in HRCT. Lung biopsy from bronchoscopy may be necessary for the diagnosis of cases without lesions in more accessible sites, such as skin (except erythema nodosum, in which the biopsy shows nonspecific findings) or superficial lymph nodes. A high degree of diagnostic accuracy is achieved if more than four samples are obtained at bronchoscopy. This is possible because lymphatic channels traverse the bronchovascular bundles in great numbers and are therefore copiously sampled in the transbronchial biopsy. (41) Furthermore, for the diagnosis of sarcoidosis, sensitivity and specificity of a CD4/CD8 ratio > 3.5 in BAL liquid are 52-59% and 94-96%, respectively. (42) Figure 4 shows the surgical lung biopsy from a patient with sarcoidosis. The lymphatic distribution can be striking and recapitulates the HRCT findings. Spread lymphangitic For information on HRCT findings in cases of disseminated lymphangitis, see above item interlobular septal thickening. Silicosis/silicatosis The inhalation of significant amounts of silica dust, either pure or mixed to aluminum and magnesium silicates, is responsible for silicatosis or pneumoconiosis known as silicosis. Visible lung nodules in chest images occur primarily as the manifestation of an occupational disease, with nodules in centrilobular and subpleural regions. Nodules are distributed in the upper and middle regions of the lungs, with subsequent predominance. Since the disease can persist or progress, even in cases where exposure to silica particles is interrupted, should be performed a detailed history of the patient. Given the long latency of the disease, should be payed special attention to former occupations, even those from the remote past. The prevalence of silicosis remains high in certain areas of professional activity in Brazil, such as mining in general, metallurgy and production of ceramic floors or porcelain and sandblasting. (43) The diagnosis of silicosis is based on the interpretation and analysis of X-rays, as well as the professional history of the worker/patient. Histopathological examination is limited to the cases where there is a discrepancy between these two analyzes, raising, therefore, the possibility of other diagnoses. (43) The transbronchial biopsy is diagnostic in most cases. Nodular lymphoid hyperplasia Currently, there is considerable ongoing debate regarding diffuse nodular lymphoid hyperplasia of the lung. The lesions are located around air and lymphatic pathways in the lung. The histopathology reveals numerous seemingly reactive lymphoid follicles with germinal centers. The diagnosis of malignant lymphoma low-grade marginal zone B-cell type should be discarded. Diffused nodular lymphoid hyperplasia in the lung can be a preneoplastic condition, and in some cases are related immunoglobulin deficiency, Sjögren's syndrome or a combination of autoimmune disease and Sjögren's syndrome. (44,45) Amyloidosis Amyloidosis is a disorder of protein folding immunoglobulin in which normally soluble plasma proteins aggregate in an insoluble abnormal fibrillar form, causing disruption to tissue structure and organ function. Diffuse amyloid deposition in the lung parenchyma is usually associated with involvement of other organ systems. Perilymphatic nodules are a rare manifestation of amyloidosis. (46) Randomized distribution nodules Nodules with random distribution are defined by their seemingly haphazard occurrence in peribronchovascular regions, interlobular septa and pleura without a consistent perilymphatic pattern and lack of a consistent relationship with secondary pulmonary lobule. Figure 10 shows the HRCT scans of a patient with hematogenous metastases from thyroid cancer. Clinical and histopathologic correlations Hematogenous metastasis Hematogenous metastasis is the most common cause of multiple randomly distributed pulmonary nodules. The basilar predominance is typical due to preferential blood flow to the lung bases. Since malignant cells penetrate the pulmonary lymphatics, they are common aspects of lymphangitis carcinomatosis with interlobular septa with irregular thickening and pleural effusion. In surgical lung biopsies, irregular nodules of endovascular and endolymphatic tumors are present (Figure 3). Although the appearance of miliary nodules have many causes, the most common are metastasis, tuberculosis, fungal infections, and sarcoidosis. (47) Miliary Metastases are often originated from thyroid cancer, renal cancer, melanoma and other cancers, whereas, larger and less profuse metastases tend to be adenocarcinomas in adults, typically originating from the lung, breast or gastrointestinal tract. Miliary tuberculosis Miliary tuberculosis is usually insidious. Reports revenue of lung tissue and secretion assays in studies of miliary tuberculosis vary widely, probably in part because of the wide variety of cases included in these studies. Overall, 50% of sputum samples collected from suspected cases are positive in culture. In a study conducted in South Africa (48) granulomas were found in 30 (63%) of 48 transbronchial biopsies, 20 of which presented necrosis. Of the 30 presenting granulomas, 13 were positive for alcohol-acid resistant bacilli (AFB) smear. Two probable involvement and affordable places to study are the liver and bone marrow. Among liver biopsies, 88% had granulomas; 45%, necrotizing granulomas; and 40% AFB. Among bone marrow biopsies, 67% had granulomas; 42%, necrotizing granulomas; and 42% AFB. (49) Miliary fungal infections Acute disseminated histoplasmosis is an uncommon presentation of miliary fungal infection in adults. In patients with a miliary pattern and granulomas on transbronchial biopsies, without necrosis or infectious agents, a lung open biopsy may be required to dispose of infectious diseases and establish a sarcoidosis diagnosis more conclusive. Nodules centrilobular The central part of the secondary pulmonary lobe contains branches of the terminal bronchioles, its respective pulmonary arteries  and, adjacent to it, the tissue holder with lymphatic vessels. Therefore, centrilobular nodular opacities may be from bronchiolar and peribronchial diseases as well as vascular and perivascular diseases. Attenuation mosaic associated with air trapping on expiratory HRCT, or functional evidence of airflow obstruction indicates diseases involving the peripheral airways. Centrilobular nodules are sometimes accompanied by opacities called "tree-in-bud", in which the abnormality resembles a budding tree (Figure 13). In most cases, the tree pattern in budding occurs as a result of infectious diseases. Tree-in-bud is a subtype of centrilobular pattern. Pathologically, this abnormality represents bronchiolar impaction and is almost always due to infection. Table 7 details the differential diagnosis. Clinical and histopathological correlations Sub-acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis Countless centrilobular nodules in frosted glass, poorly defined and with uniform distribution are characteristic of sub-acute HP (Figure 11). (50) This diagnosis can be confirmed by a history of exposure, clinical symptoms with symptoms similar to flu, lymphocytosis in BAL fluid and clinical improvement when the patient is away from the agressor environmental agent. In the subacute phase, surgical lung biopsy shows characteristic findings (chronic bronchiolitis, cell interstitial pneumonia and granulomas nonnecrotizing, malformed and dispersed in the alveolar walls and peribronchial regions; Figure 12), especially when birds antigens are responsible. Plasma cells are typically prominent in the interstitium in HP. Respiratory bronchiolitis associated with interstitial lung disease Respiratory bronchiolitis associated with interstitial lung disease (RB-ILD) appears to exist within one DILDs spectrum related to smoking, sometimes coexisting with HCL. Typically, RB-ILD produces centrilobular nodules poorly defined in small quantity and predominantly in the upper lobes. In cases of RB-ILD, the HRCT findings can simulate subacute HP, with malformed nodular abnormalities and scattered with areas of hypoattenuation (mosaic pattern). However, the history of the patient is generally useful (RB-ILD occurs only in smokers, while PH is rare in smokers) and the profile of the LBA is usually definitive in distinguishing between DPI and PH. Both in RB-ILD and in bronchiolitis, there is a characteristic brown pigmentation of macrophages. The histopathological difference lies in the extent of the reaction of the peribronchial macrophages (much higher in RB-ILD). The findings in LBA, in addition to the personal history and findings in HRCT, generally allow the diagnosis of BR-DPI without the need for lung biopsy through thoracoscopy. (51) Langerhans cell histiocytosis In smokers, poorly defined centrilobular nodules can also be seen early in LCH, without the presence of cysts. Since LCH is a disease based on the airways, a finding in transbronchial biopsy LCH lesion is not unexpected. Langerhans cells can be found in the BAL fluid of patients with one of the various types of inflammatory conditions, potentially producing a false-positive result if this mode is used as a diagnostic test for the HCL. (41) The understanding of the CT findings is essential for an accurate diagnosis. The exact incidence of LCH in the smoking population remains unknown. (52) Follicular bronchiolitis Reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, present in a peribronchial distribution is known as follicular bronchiolitis. In radiological and pathological literature, follicular bronchiolitis and lymphoid interstitial pneumonia are considered to represent two ends of a spectrum; the first being located in peribronchial regions and the second being more diffuse. Underlying conditions associated with follicular bronchiolitis includes rheumatoid arthritis, collagen vascular disease mixed, Sjögren's syndrome, other autoimmune diseases and syndrome of hereditary or acquired immunodeficiency. (53,54) The disease may occur in idiopathic form. Infectious pneumonia In the immunocompromised host, bacterial infections (Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae), fungal (more commonly Aspergillus spp.) and, very rarely, viral can result in a tree-in-bud pattern accompanied by variable consolidation (including cytomegalovirus and respiratory syncytial virus). (55) Infectious bronchiolitis
In the normal host, acute diffuse bronchiolitis without associated consolidation (Figure 14) might occasionally result from viral or mycoplasma infection. (56, 57) Residual bronchiectasis can result. The PH, which can also present diffuse centrilobular nodules, hardly ever presents tree-in-bud lesions. Endobronchial dissemination of Mycobacterium tuberculosis The infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis typically produces a tree budding pattern, which indicates active disease. Associated cavitation is highly suggestive but can be absent. (58) Infection with M. avium intracellulare complex When the tree-in-bud pattern is found in elderly caucasian woman, infection with M. avium-intracellulare complex should always be considered. The radiological manifestations consist of bronchiectasis and multiple centrilobular nodules. The disease is more severe in the lingula and middle lobe. (59) The examination of sputum and culture are essential for the diagnosis of mycobacterial infections. The Bronchoscopy may be necessary to obtain secretions and biopsies for culture. The bronchiectasis diseases that result in bronchiectasis are commonly accompanied by tree-in-bud lesions. (60) In cystic fibrosis, the tree-in-bud pattern can be an early sign of the disease. Diffuse panbronchiolitis Diffuse panbronchiolitis is a histopathologically characteristic disease represented by an inflammatory condition with extensive involvement of the peripheral airways, producing a tree in-bud pattern with or without associated bronchiectasis. Although the term diffuse panbronchiolitis implies a generic inflammatory disease of the bronchioles, histopathology is sufficiently distinct that when found, is rarely forgotten and not easily confused with other inflammatory disorders. The disease is described primarily in Asian-American patients. However, some cases have been reported in non-Asian Brazilians. (61,62) The disease is predominantly seen between the second and fifth decades of life. Chronic sinusitis is common. In Western countries, where the disease is rare, a lung biopsy is usually required for diagnosis. (63) The transbronchial or open biopsy shows a distinctive accumulation of foamy histiocytes in bronchiolar walls and in the immediate peribronchial regions. (64) Diffuse aspiration bronchiolitis Chronic inflammatory reaction to repeated aspiration of foreign material results in diffuse aspiration bronchiolitis. (65) Conditions favoring aspiration, such as esophageal disorders and neurological defects, are typically found. Follicular bronchiolitis Follicular bronchiolitis is a rare cause of tree pattern in budding and more unusual in its diffuse form. Tumor emboli In rare cases, tumor emboli can expand the small vessels and produce a standard of tree-in-bud. (55) Clinical approach to diagnosis of patients with centrilobular opacities In standard cases tree-in-bud and centrilobular nodules (with or without alveolar attenuation / frosted glass), the transbronchial biopsy and BAL are the methods of choice for diagnosing infections (tuberculosis, fungal, viral and bacterial pneumonia lobular), neoplasms (bronchoalveolar cell carcinoma and carcinomatous lymphangitis) and cryptogenic pulmonary inflammatory disorders (PH, HCL and sarcoidosis). (66) If the transbronchial biopsy and BAL are negative, surgical lung biopsy may be necessary. Standard 3. Increased lung opacity Increased lung opacity can be described as opaque frosted glass or consolidation. Ground-glass opacity (Figure 15) is an increased lung opacity that does not obscure the associated vessels and represents abnormalities below the HRCT resolution. Consolidation (Figure 16) is an increased lung opacity in which the vessels are obscured and represents a confluent disease. These findings are nonspecific and may reflect diseases that are primarily alveolar, interstitial or mixed. The differential diagnosis of ground-glass opacity and consolidation is often overlapping and is predominantly based on the duration of symptoms: acute or chronic (Table 8). The distribution of findings (focal, segmental or diffuse/symmetric) can be helpful in narrowing the differential diagnosis (Table 9). The parenchymal consolidation and ground-glass opacity are HRCT findings that have been associated with active or reversible lung disease. However, ground-glass opacity can also be found in cases where fibrosis is the predominant abnormality. The ground-glass attenuation can only be considered as indicative of potentially reversible disease if no findings of fibrosis associated in the same area. The differential diagnosis of ground-glass opacities and consolidation should be based on the immune status of the host and the duration of symptoms. The presence of connective tissue disorders, inhalant environmental and drug use should also be considered when the presence of increased diffuse lung opacity. Acute increased opacity Clinical and histopathological correlations Pulmonary edema The most common cause of acute diffuse pulmonary disorders with ground-glass opacities/consolidation is pulmonary edema. In hydrostatic edema, there is usually a combination of septal thickening and ground-glass opacities. The size of the heart may be normal or increased. The thickening of perihilar peribronchovascular interstitial (peribronchial cuffing) and fissures are common. Vascular distribution is balanced or inverted. Opacities poorly-defined and indistinct can also be viewed. Hydrostatic edema tends to present a perihilar and gravitational distribution. In the non-cardiogenic edema, the size of the heart is normal, vascular distribution is normal or balanced, and the distribution of edema is segmented or peripheral. The peribronchial and septal lines are generally absent. (67) Acute respiratory distress syndrome The acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) may result from a wide variety of lung injuries, including trauma, aspiration, sepsis and infectious pneumonia. (68) The distribution of CT abnormalities are typically bilateral, dependent on severity and marked on lung bases. When ARDS is caused by pulmonary disease, tends to be asymmetrical with a mix of consolidation and ground-glass opacity, whereas when it is caused by extrapulmonary disease has predominantly opacity in symmetrical frosted glass. Both hydrostatic edema and ARDS commonly presents pleural effusion and air bronchograms. The traction bronchiectasis in diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) suggests that the disease is in the proliferative or fibrotic phase. (69) Bacterial pneumonia infections. Bacterial pneumonia, especially caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Legionella, or other agents including mycoplasmas, may result in fulminant pneumonia, ARDS. Pneumocystis jiroveci. Pneumocystis jiroveci should always be considered. Cystic changes, accompanied by opacities diffuse ground-glass, are highly suggestive, but are found in less than one-third of all cases. Pneumonia Cytomegalovirus. Cytomegalovirus pneumonia can result in interstitial pneumonia, and severe cases DAD. The most useful finding in differentiating the infectious causes from the non-infectious ones of acute diffuse lung disease in the typical host is the presence or absence of centrilobular nodules. When present in a segmented distribution, they suggest infectious disease. (70) Pneumonitis hypersensitivity Centrilobular nodules with opacity in distributed diffuse frosted glass and profusely through the lungs are characteristic of PH. In other cases, areas of ground-glass attenuation, centrilobular nodules and opacities airspace targeted with micronodules are displayed. In the acute stage, airspace consolidation can be found. (50) Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) The DAH, defined as active bleeding within the alveolar parenchyma, produces increased lung opacity. There are several causes of DAH. The renal impairment should always be suggestive of a vasculitis etiology or connective tissue disease. When DAH occurs as an immune phenomenon is often accompanied by systemic vasculitis, and in such cases, serological studies are essential for diagnosis and treatment (71) Hemoptysis may be absent. Figure 17 shows a surgical lung biopsy sample from a patient with Wegener's granulomatosis which had hemoptysis and opacity perihilar frosted glass. To avoid confusion with traumatic bleeding caused by the biopsy procedure, DAH should never be diagnosed in the absence of siderophores and fibrin, signs that bleeding is a true manifestation of immunologic injury (the cause of most cases of DAH). Although confusion can occur with a patient with acute bleeding associated with airways (such as observed in bronchiectasis), this is almost always a segmental or lobar phenomenon, rather than diffuse. Acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP) The idiopathic form of DAD is clinically defined as AIP, which is the same idiopathic clinicopathologic entity described by Hamman and Rich in 4 patients. (72) Patients with AIP present progressive respiratory symptoms and respiratory failure occurring in the course of days to weeks. The disease differs from other forms of DAD by the absence of an identifiable cause or predisposing disease. The diagnosis to be disposed is that of infection and specific organism staining (at least Grocott technique for fungi and pneumocystis) must always be performed, as in all cases of DAD. The biopsy shows hyaline membranes lining alveolar spaces, typically with interstitial and airspace organization when the biopsy is performed. (73) The findings on CT are typically indistinguishable from those of ARDS and include consolidation of extensive bilateral airspace and targeted or diffuse area of ground-glass attenuation. The traction bronchiectasis is usually visible as a late manifestation in the areas of airspace consolidation or ground-glass attenuation. Some patients with IPF (or other interstitial pneumonias) may experience a precipitous course, with periods of acute deterioration of respiratory status, together with DAD and other manifestations of the acute injury. (74) Digital clubbing is limited to patients with acute exacerbations of base fibrotic lung disease and serves as a useful clue to differentiate them from PIA patients. Pneumonitis caused by radiation: acute pulmonary manifestations may occur approximately 8 weeks after the radiation therapy completion in doses of 40 Gy or more. Thoracic irradiation is a relatively uncommon cause of acute pulmonary increased opacity. (75) Drug-induced interstitial lung disease:
Drug-induced interstitial lung disease (acute lung opacity) can have a number of histopathologic manifestations, including DAD, eosinophilic pneumonia, organizing pneumonia (OP) and, in rare cases, pulmonary hemorrhage. (36.37) Furthermore, a single drug may cause different histologic reactions in many patients. It was evident that DAD is associated with many pharmacologic agents, among those that are chemotherapeutic agents such as bleomycin. Connective tissue disease associated to interstitial lung disease Like drugs, systemic autoimmune diseases can produce a wide variety of histological patterns. (76) In previously diagnosed patients with connective tissue disease (CTD), DAD or acute PO may occur - or pneumonitis may represent the initial manifestation of the disease, especially in patients with systemic erythematosus lupus, polymyositis and adult Still's disease. (77.78) Creatine phosphokinase and ferritin should be measured in order to assess these last two diseases. Eosinophilic pneumonia Acute Acute eosinophilic pneumonia can occur in asthmatic patients but may also be due to the use of drugs and illegal drugs or even from heavy cigarette smoking. An idiopathic form was reported. Only one-third of the patients have an elevated peripheral eosinophil count. BAL shows eosinophil > 25%. (79) The treatment of the patient with up to a single dose of corticosteroid before the biopsy can reduce significantly the number of eosinophils in the tissue and thereby complicate the diagnosis. Organizing pneumonia Lung damage in organization due to any cause can be clinically acute, resulting in a presentation of respiratory failure. (80) The acute noninfectious can be idiopathic, associated with CTD, or related to drug toxicity. An intermediate form between DAD and PO, called acute fibrinous pneumonia is in organization  characterized by profuse fibrinous alveolar exudates, but without hyaline membranes. By definition, there is no infection. Acute fibrinous and organizing pneumonia may be idiopathic or associated with an underlying condition or concurrent, such as collagen vascular disease, reaction to drugs and occupational exposure. The clinical management DILDs acute non-infectious usually have symptoms that are consistent with pneumonia´s. (81) Patients suspected of having ARDS at the bottom of pneumonia and those who have ARDS but without a clear predisposing condition should be submitted to LBA and, depending on the results, a lung biopsy, to rule out one of the forms of noninfectious acute DILD Lymphocytosis (>25%) in BAL fluid is the rule in PH. A predominance of neutrophils in BAL fluid suggests DAD or infection; blood in sequential BAL samples indicates DAH; eosinophilia, or acute eosinophilic pneumonia. In the setting of acute lung disease, The infection always tops the list of differential diagnoses. Transbronchial biopsies, bronchial washings and BAL have a crucial role in the clinical evaluation. When the fibrin, hyaline membranes, or the organization in the alveolar spaces are identified, the differential diagnosis includes infection, drug toxicity, DTC and PIA. (1) Specific staining for bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial infections should be performed. In the absence of these agents, a careful search for cytopathic changes is recommended, especially if the patient is immunocompromised and, in particular, in the presence of necrosis. In cases of acute HP, biopsy can reveal DAD with typical HP findings (granulomas and cellular pneumonitis). The causes of DAD diagnosed through surgical lung biopsy have been reported in some studies. (82, 83) The most common causes are infections and PIA. Other important causes are CTD, IPF exacerbation and drug use. The infections are most common in immunocompromised hosts. In selected patients with clinical ARDS, the open biopsy can be performed safely, and often reveals an unsuspected diagnosis, leading to changes in therapy. (82) Chronic consolidation / ground-glass opacity previously healthy patient who presents with mild chronic dyspnea and ground-glass opacity (or diffuse consolidation) should be investigated as HP, DIP, RB-ILD, PINE, PIA, PO, bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia, chronic eosinophilic pneumonia (CEP) and sarcoidosis. (84) Patients rarely present some of the atypical causes of chronic consolidation/ground-glass opacity, such as pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), bronchoalveolar carcinoma (BAC) and lymphoma. Even though ground-glass opacity and consolidation can denote interstitial or alveolar disease, (85) the ground-glass opacity is most commonly found in HP, DIP, RB-ILD and PINE. The consolidation is mainly seen in OP, CEP, and BAC. The smoking history may be an important additional factor in this population. Patients with PID or RB-ILD are almost exclusively smokers. The BAL finding in this group of diseases can be highly specific and can directly confirm a diagnosis or condition, effectively supplanting a lung biopsy. Diffuse diseases presenting chronic increased lung opacity and usually diagnosed by BAL include alveolar proteinosis, CBA and PEC. In addition, the BAL cytology of support combined with clinical and HRCT features is often sufficient for the diagnosis of PH (lymphocytes, plasma cells and foamy macrophages) or OP (mixed cellularity and low CD4/CD8). (86) Clinical and histopathological correlations Hypersensitivity pneumonitis In a normal host nonsmoker and without heart failure, the most common cause of ground-glass opacity is PH. (84) In PH, the ground-glass opacity indicates subacute disease. With relevant exposure, a pattern of ground-glass opacity associated with centrilobular nodules and lobular air trapping (the so-called head-cheese or terrine sign standard, Figure 18) strongly suggests the diagnosis. non-specific interstitial pneumonia has been shown that CTD, HP, lung disease and drug-induced ARDS can produce a histologic pattern of NSIP. (87) However, it is still controversial whether the NSIP is a distinct PIU's condition. Moreover, the inclusion of honeycombing from HRCT in the diagnosis algorithm further obscures this distinction. Although the therapeutic response and the survival are better in the NSIP than in the UIP, recent studies have shown that the two diseases may have minor differences in gene expression. (88) In other cases, NSIP can exhibit an indistinct Genetic PH profile. (89) The ground-glass opacity is common in the NSIP, and when accompanied by traction bronchiectasis or irregular reticulation, NSIP reflects the fibrotic form of the disease (cellular NSIP is very rare). At this point, given the inherent diversity of conditions known to produce the NSIP pattern on HRCT and on histopathology, caution is advisable when trying to predict the prognosis of a certain patient. Chronic forms of organizing pneumonia Indolent forms (smoldering) and non-infectious chronic OP can produce clinical findings of progressive dyspnea, low fever, constitutional symptoms and lung consolidations that do not respond to standard treatment for infectious pneumonia. Many conditions can result in PO. In a study conducted in São Paulo, Brazil, involving 95 patients, OP was idiopathic in a third of the cases and secondary to an identifiable cause in the remaining cases. (90) The most common causes were: drugs (especially amiodarone and MTX), environmental exposure (such as those observed in PH), chronic aspiration and DTC. Consolidations, central or peripheral, were found in 64% of the cases; ground-glass opacity in 53%; and nodules in 26%. The transbronchial biopsy was diagnosed in 58% of the cases. In cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP), typical CT patterns consist of peripheral parenchymal consolidations with air bronchograms and frosted glass opacities with varied association. Consolidations in OCD suggest the diagnosis when subpleural and peribronchovascular distributions occur together or when the opacities are migratory. (91) The signal-shaped atoll or reverse halo (central opaque frosted glass surrounded by a rim or ring of consolidation) is found in the PO, but can also be seen in other conditions such as PEC and paracoccidioidomycosis. (92.93) In a study, one perilobular pattern abnormalities (curvilinear opacities having greater thickness and, most importantly, less sharply defined than those found in thickened interlobular septa, and an arch-shaped appearance or polygonal) were observed in more than half of the patients. (94) The OP diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical, histological and image findings. (95) In DTC cases, the exposure cases to drugs or environmental antigens, as well as in cases of vacuum, localized areas of PO may be a secondary pathological finding. Therefore, a diagnosis of OP should be done only in the presence of typical HRCT findings, the absence of indicative fibrosis findings on HRCT and with a good response to corticosteroids. If these criteria are not met, surgical lung biopsy should be performed. Acute interstitial pneumonia:
Acute interstitial pneumonia is typically characterized by the rapid development of progressive dyspnea and cough; in rare cases, lesser respiratory symptoms may persist for up to 60 days. (96) Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia is usually associated with Sjögren's syndrome in adults and in children with HIV infection. (97) The most common CT findings are opacity in diffuse frosted glass and consolidation; thin-walled cysts may also be present, presumably due to follicular bronchiolitis. Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia, first described by Liebow is definitely represented by the lymphoid tissue associated with lymphoma B cell low-grade mucosa (known as MALToma) lung. It should be remembered that the increasing dense lymphoid tissue in the lung is always considered lymphoma until proven otherwise. Patients with Sjögren's syndrome who have obstructive physiology, as well as cysts or nodules on HRCT, but who do not present a ground-glass opacity, can be diagnosed with follicular bronchiolitis without conducting the open biopsy. In other cases, a surgical biopsy must be performed to rule out lymphoma. (98) Pulmonary lymphomas: Primary lymphomas of the lung are rare. One of the most common is MALToma, which is also known as "B cell lymphoma of extranodal marginal zone". These pulmonary lymphomas characteristically present an indolent and low grade morphology, and can be present in healthy individuals or in patients with Sjögren's syndrome. High-grade lymphomas may also occur in the lungs, although these tend to be more localized in the images and are much easier to diagnose through histopathology. Low-grade MALTomas may be difficult or impossible to distinguish from benign lymphoid hyperplasia and lymphoid interstitial pneumonia. Fortunately, the progression of the form of low-grade disease is very slow. (99) Sarcoidosis In rare cases, sarcoidosis can present opaque frosted glass or consolidations. The frequency of the opacity reported on frosted glass varies a lot, and this finding is occasionally the predominant abnormality. The ground-glass opacity is typically multifocal rather than diffuse. (100) Pathologic correlation of ground-glass opacity in patients with sarcoidosis demonstrates that conglomerate granulomas can occur, as well as delicate fibrosis below the HRCT resolution limits. (101-103) Consolidations mimicking PO are uncommon in sarcoidosis. (104) The presentation is acute and the prognosis is excellent. Other findings of sarcoidosis and miliary nodules on CT are also commonly found. Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia The significant accumulation of eosinophils in the lungs is a PEC's characteristic. It was suggested that a differential cell count is bigger than 40% eosinophils in the BAL fluid is the diagnosis of PEC. (105) The symptoms are similar to those found in OCD (fever, weight loss, night sweats, cough, and dyspnea), evolving over weeks or months. Asthma anticipates the diagnosis in 50% of cases. Similar to the POC, consolidations can be migratory. In fact, both diseases are difficult or impossible to distinguish in HRCT (106) and, in some cases, overlapping in lung biopsies. The PEC diagnosis is based on a history of insidious clinical manifestation, characteristic appearance on chest radiography of peripheral infiltrates with transient opacities and peripheral eosinophilia. In this scenario, most authors do not recommend a lung biopsy. BAL analysis can be useful in cases without peripheral eosinophilia. Many conditions can end up in eosinophilic lung diseases. For a SGP diagnosis, it is important to rule out known causes of pulmonary eosinophilia: careful examination and history to rule out systemic diseases (Churg-Strauss syndrome, sarcoidosis, etc. ) as well as a careful review of the use of concomitant medications to discard drug-induced pulmonary eosinophilia. The stool test for identifying eggs and parasites is important. (105) It is not uncommon to diagnose bacterial pneumonia incorrectly instead of CEP. The hallmark of CEP is a rapid and dramatic response to oral corticosteroids. Exogenous lipoid pneumonia:
Prolonged micro-aspiration of lipid emulsions can produce lung disease with distinctive HRCT pattern sometimes referred to as crazy-paving pattern: low attenuation consolidation and ground-glass opacities. The most common chronic form of this disease is caused by prolonged intake of laxatives based on mineral oil to treat constipation. (107) The diagnosis is suggested by the finding of free lipid or lipids in the vacuoles of alveolar cells in the BAL fluid. If not confirmed, it is necessary to perform transbronchial or surgical biopsy. In many cases, the cause is determined in retrospect, after the diagnosis has been established by surgical lung biopsy. Bronchioalveolar carcinoma The definition of BAC is adenocarcinoma showing growth of neoplastic cells among alveolar structures (lepidic growth) without evidence of stromal, vascular, or pleural invasion. (108) There are three BAC subtypes: non-mucinous, mucinous and mixed. The pattern of pneumonia is more common in patients with mucinous type, and those patients are often misdiagnosed with infectious pneumonia. Radiographic findings such as ground-glass opacities, non-termination consolidation and centrilobular satellite nodules due to bronchogenic dissemination should raise the suspicion of BAC. (109) Classically, BAC demonstrates a relatively slow growth pattern and an indolent clinical course. However, in a subgroup of patients, rapid growth and death due to bilateral diffuse consolidative disease occur months after diagnosis. Patients with advanced diffuse BAC can display severe bronchorrhea and hypoxemia refractory to intrapulmonary shunts. (110) The BAL usually reveals the presence of well-differentiated neoplastic alveolar cells, although this finding is not sufficient to differentiate BAC from a metastatic or invasive adenocarcinoma. (111) It is important to distinguish between BAC and metastases of a primary colon tumor, which can mimic the histopathologic appearance and even immunophenotype of mucinous BAC. (112) A core needle biopsy or a surgical specimen is required to distinguish BAC from other forms of lung adenocarcinoma. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis The accumulation of surfactant due to poor catabolism by alveolar macrophages leads to the development of PAP. This is mainly due to anti-granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor antibodies  (GM-CSF) and the resulting lack of maturation differentiation of the lineage of monocytes/macrophages. (113) Chest X-ray can reveal ground-glass opacity or asymmetric consolidation, often with perihilar predominance. The HRCT images have the appearance of ground-glass opacities, in the geographical airspace, with interlobular septal thickening, resulting in crazy-paving pattern. However, this pattern is not specific for PAP and can be seen in mucinous BAC, exogenous lipoid pneumonia, sarcoidosis, NSIP, OP, pneumocystis pneumonia and several other diffuse acute conditions. (114) However, when this pattern is extensive and symmetrical in a patient with chronic symptoms, PAP is strongly suggested. The findings in BAL play a crucial role in the diagnosis of PAP (the classic "milky" effluent is considered diagnostic). In idiopathic cases, the determination of serum antibodies against GM-CSF (high levels indicating PAP) is a non-invasive way to confirm the diagnosis. (113) Pattern Decreased lung opacity Several abnormalities are associated with abnormally reduced attenuation. Honeycombing and bronchiectasis are important to differentiate abnormally reduced attenuation from other cystic abnormalities. Emphysema is characterized by lung destruction affecting different parts of the secondary pulmonary lobule, and is classified into three distributions (Table 10, Images 19, 20 and 21). Cystic diseases Primary cystic lung diseases are rare and must be differentiated from other more common diseases that produce abnormal (low) attenuation. Table 11 lists aspects and differential diagnosis of pulmonary cysts. Pulmonary cysts are generally round lesions, well-defined and circumscribed with a thin wall (typically < 3mm thickness). (115) A frequent cause of localized cystic lung changes is advanced fibrosis that causes honeycombing. These cysts may have a diameter ranging from several millimeters to several centimeters. This wall is shared by adjacent cysts, a finding not seen in other cystic lung diseases. (115) Some diseases can mimic cystic lung diseases on CT. The two most common causes of potential confusion are cystic bronchiectasis and emphysema (see below), although other conditions can be associated with cysts. Cystic bronchiectasis When diffuse, cystic bronchiectasis can mimic cystic lung disease on HRCT. However, the differentiation between the two entities is usually possible when a branch of the accompanying pulmonary artery making a ring-shaped sign is seen, as well as, when observing the adjacent CT slices and images in another reconstruction phase, the slices display a tubular feature of the abnormality. Emphysema In general, emphysema has three main forms of presentation: centrilobular, in which it includes multiple low centrilobular attenuations, small and with or without occasionally visible walls predominating in the upper lung zones (Image 19). Paraseptal emphysema (Image 20) may occasionally simulate honeycomb changes in the lung. Paraseptal emphysematous alterations are generally in a deep layer of the subpleural portion of the lung, whilst honeycomb alteration is typically observed as a stacking of two or more layers of small cystic spaces with thick walls along the pulmonar periphery. In the centrilobular emphysema, there is rarely a wall in the cyst, and vessels can be seen following the cystic air paces, although there may be fibrosis in the spaces of the centrilobular emphysema, with an aspect of resulting pulmonary cyst. The panlobular emphysema predominates in the pulmonary bases. In panlobular emphysema, there is a general decrease in lung attenuation (Image 21). Respiratory bronchiolitis associated to interstitial lung disease The definition of RB-ILD is an interstitial lung disease related to smoking in which the cysts can result from bronchiolitis or centrilobular associated emphysema. The HRCT interpretation can be more complicated when emphysema and RB-ILD are present in the upper lobes and fibrosis is in the lung bases, where honeycombing may also be present. In such cases, spirometry may be normal, but the DLCO and gas exchange are severely impaired. (118) Langerhans cell histiocytosis The CT findings in LCH depend on the stage of disease and proportion between nodules and cysts. (119) Regardless of the stage of the disease, there is relative sparing of the lung bases compared to the superior part. Initially, CT findings consist predominantly of nodular pattern with lesions  with 1 to 10mm in diameter, and typical jagged edges. Some nodes may present cavitation (Image 22). As the disease advances, cysts become the predominant finding. In the terminal stage of the disease, cysts may be the only finding, without remaining nodes. The combination of cysts and nodules, which preserve the lung bases in non-smoking men, is enough for a reliable diagnosis of LCH. (120)In female smokers, lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) should be considered, since nodules (and cysts) may also be present. (121) The Langerhans cells can be identified in the BAL fluid, although the sensitivity and specificity of this test are very low. The definitive diagnosis of LCH requires the identification of Langerhans cell lesions, which are usually obtained through lung biopsy at a selected area based on chest HRCT. In practice, however, lung biopsy is performed on case-by-case approach. (122) In surgical lung biopsies, the presence of stellate scars may be the only indication for diagnosis. At this stage of the disease, lesions contain few Langerhans cells. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Patients presenting an abnormal proliferation of atypical smooth muscle cells in the lungs, kidneys, lymphatic vessels, or any combination of sites may be considered as candidates for the diagnosis of LAM. The disease can occur sporadically or be associated with tuberous sclerosis complex. In both cases, LAM is seen only in adult women, who generally present LAM after menopause. The gold standard for the diagnosis of LAM is a biopsy of lung tissue or of the lymph vessels involved, with nodular infiltration by abnormal smooth muscle cells, called LAM cells. Immunohistochemical analysis shows that these peculiar and distinctive smooth muscle cells are positive for melanoma markers HMB45 and MART-1, as well as estrogen/progesterone receptors, smooth muscle actin and desmin. HRCT shows multiple thin-walled cysts scattered all over the lung fields in an irregular distribution, with areas of normal lung parenchyma (Figure 23). When the lung appearance is classical and the patient also shows other typical manifestations of LAM, a tissue biopsy is required for diagnosis. (122) In cases requiring biopsy for diagnosis, surgical lung biopsy may show an extremely variable extent of the disease, ranging from thin-walled cysts with LAM cells in their walls (Images 24 and 25) and prevalent chronic bleeding that may obscure diagnostic findings. A benign epithelial cell proliferation may also be present in LAM patients who have tuberous sclerosis complex. Those injuries are known as "micronodular pneumocyte hyperplasia" and are not stained with the LAM cell markers listed above. Neurofibromatosis type 1: In cases of neurofibromatosis type 1, HRCT reveals ground-glass opacities, bibasilar reticular opacities, bullae and cysts, as well as emphysema in the upper lobes. (123) Other interstitial lung diseases with cysts Cysts can occur in various DILDs, including chronic HP, chronic sarcoidosis, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia, DIP and RB-ILD. (120,124,125) In a study of diagnostic accuracy of HRCT in chronic cystic lung diseases, (120) a reliable diagnosis was obtained by two radiologists in about half the cases. (126) In that study, the diagnosis was correct in approximately 90% of cases in which the diagnosis was DIP/RB-ILD, lymphoid interstitial pneumonia, LAM and LCH, and in 100% of cases UIP. Mosaic perfusion (Image 18) shows regions of decreased pulmonary attenuatiion due to a reduction in blood flow. This may be the result of bronchiolar or vascular diseases. When the lung appears heterogeneous, it is important to discern which regions are abnormal: low or high attenuation. Lung density is usually a factor of confusion when trying to differentiate mosaic perfusion (low attenuation) of ground-glass opacity (high attenuation). Table 12 presents the useful aspects in this differentiation. Mosaic perfusion can be seen in any bronchiolar or vascular disease and, therefore, the differential is quite broad. When this phenomenon is the result of vascular disease, HRCT findings mimic those seen in patients with infiltrative disease in inspiratory scanning; however, in expiratory scanning, air trapping should not be a dominant aspect in vascular disease. Unfortunately, vascular diseases can be difficult to identify correctly via HRCT and can easily be mistaken by infiltrative pulmonary diseases or diseases of the airways. (127) Functional evidence of airway obstruction or elevated residual volume can be useful in those cases. Air trapping is an indirect sign of obstructive disease of the small airways and can be identified by the presence of mosaic attenuation on inspiratory CT, accentuated with expiratory images. Although air trapping is easily detected when it produces focal mosaic attenuation, it can be difficult to detect when it is diffuse. As air trapping usually becomes apparent only in expiratory imaging, expiratory scans are an essential part of the assessment of bronchiolitis by CT. However, the interpretation of the expiratory CT is complicated because it is known that the prevalence of air trapping, in healthy individuals, can be substantial. The air trapping finding on CT should be ignored in the absence of physiological evidence of high residual volume (via plethysmography), airway obstruction or dyspnea. (128) If mosaic perfusion is seen in the absence of any other abnormalities (e.g., bronchiectasis, tree-in-bud and other signs of chronic pulmonary emboli), the differential diagnosis is more focused and includes the diseases listed below. Asthma and chronic bronchiolitis Nonsmokers with persistent airway obstruction and the diagnosis of asthma or COPD may have associated chronic bronchiolitis. In the absence of increased eosinophils in sputum and lack of response to standard treatments for asthma, those patients should be evaluated with expiratory HRCT. Those with significant air trapping should be considered for surgical lung biopsy for better identification of the underlying disease. (129) With the exception of the observed in transplanted patients, the most common forms of bronchiolitis resulting in isolated mosaic attenuation in clinical DIPD are the following: a) connective tissue disorders (especially rheumatoid arthritis) b) previous viral or mycoplasma infections c) chronic HP d) cryptogenic constrictive bronchiolitis and pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia Constrictive bronchiolitis constrictive cryptogenic bronchiolitis is defined as the permanent damage to the small airways, with no identifiable cause. (130) This disorder is rare and occurs mostly in women. Cryptogenic constrictive bronchiolitis tends to be progressive and shows a poor response to corticosteroid therapy, but may respond to immunosuppressive agents. The progressive airflow impairment may result in respiratory failure and death. The pathology is generally mild and usually based on the recognition of bronchiolar loss (which may be difficult to quantify), typically accompanied by dilated bronchioles with thin walls and sparse, plus mucous stasis in the airway lumens. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis Patients with HP can present an isolated mosaic pattern due to subacute disease (cellular bronchiolitis with giant cells or granulomas) or chronic, with fibrotic bronchiolitis. (16,131) The possibility of environmental exposure should be carefully investigated. Hyperplasia of diffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cells The hyperplasia of diffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cells is a very rare and poorly understood condition characterized by mosaic perfusion due to air trapping, wall thickening of the airways and occasional small nodules on HRCT. (132) The number of neuroendocrine cells is increasing around the small air paths and between their epithelium. The disease primarily affects middle-aged women and manifests itself as an unexplained obstruction of the air paths (since the disease typically affects non-smokers). Clinical and histopathological correlations The mosaic perfusion can be seen in any bronchiolar or vascular disease, and the differential diagnosis is therefore very broad. In some cases, it is difficult to differentiate these diseases from an infiltrative disease. However, based on the distinguishing features listed in Table 12, a reliable diagnosis can usually be made. Air trapping on expiratory CT, which is not seen in vascular disease, can confirm the diagnosis of airway disease. (133) Functional evidence of obstruction to airflow or elevated residual volume can be very useful in difficult cases. Bronchiolitis obliterans is a common finding in patients with bronchiectasis of any cause. (134) As an isolated microscopic finding, is etiologically non-specific and must be interpreted in the context of clinical presentation and radiographic features. In other words, clinically distinct disease processes can exhibit histologically overlapping patterns of bronchiolitis Despite morphologically nonspecific findings, in many cases certain forms of bronchiolitis are histologically distinct; these tend to occur in characteristic clinical settings. Injuries such as constrictive bronchiolitis and diffuse panbronchiolitis are some examples. However, even these microscopic patterns have no diagnostic significance unless correlated with clinical and radiographic aspects. (135) "Headcheese" or "terrine" signal
The combination of ground-glass opacity and mosaic perfusion in the same patient is termed of headcheese or terrine signal (Table 13; Figures 26 and 27). This gives the lung a heterogeneous appearance with three lung densities: high attenuation (ground-glass opacity); normal; and low attenuation (mosaic perfusion). Since it is typically due to PH, this finding is very useful. (136) Final considerations: Since HRCT is the radiological imaging technique that most closely reflects the changes in the lung structure, this is the method of choice for the diagnostic study of patients with DILD or suspected DILD. Although a single HRCT finding is often nonspecific, the combination of various findings together with their anatomical distribution, can suggest a probable diagnosis.   