OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to characterize by computed tomography scan of the chest the main pulmonary changes in hydrostatic pulmonary edema. METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the CT scans of fifteen patients with clinical hydrostatic pulmonary edema divided into five main etiological groups: congestive heart failure, acute mitral valve disease, acute myocardial infarction, myocarditis and fibrosing mediastinitis, being seven patients classified the first group and two in each other. RESULTS: The main findings of hydrostatic edema were ground glass opacities (100%), interlobular septal thickening (100%), pleural effusion (87%) and peribronchovascular interstitial thickening (80%). Other less common findings were increased caliber of the vessels, consolidations, and nodules airspace. CONCLUSION: The predominant pattern found in the patients studied was the ground-glass opacities associated with thickening of the interlobular septa (standard-paving) with bilateral pleural effusion, predominantly right. Key words: Pulmonary edema; Computed tomography x-ray; INTRODUCTION Lung Pulmonary edema is a common pathological condition that occurs when the interstitial fluid production rate exceeds the lung capacity of elimination of this liquid, leading to an accumulation of it. Pulmonary edema can be the result of increased production extravascular fluid or withdrawal of interstitial fluid disability.(1-4) Pulmonary edema can be classified into four types: hydrostatic edema, edema by increasing permeability, with or without diffuse alveolar damage and joint swelling, which is the combination of the two mechanisms (increased hydrostatic pressure and permeability pulmonary capillary).(1,3) This study only evaluated the CT findings of hydrostatic pulmonary edema. Hydrostatic edema is characterized by a Transudative mechanism and heart failure is the most common cause.(1.5) There are other causes, but to a lesser prevalence, that lead to pulmonary venous obstruction accompanied by hydrostatic edema.(1,3,5) The radiological aspects of hydrostatic edema have been extensively studied, but the tomographic findings, especially the high-resolution, have been little explored and their knowledge is important for the differential diagnosis with other lung diseases, to prevent, in some circumstances, performance of unnecessary lung biopsies.(6) The tomographic findings described in the current literature are similar to those seen in other pulmonary diseases. Therefore, including pulmonary edema in the differential diagnosis in these cases can aid clinicians to the correct final diagnosis. This study aimed to describe the pulmonary changes in hydrostatic edema observed on computed tomography scan of the chest.   METHODS We conducted a retrospective study, based on research of radiology files from five medical institutions of the Rio de Janeiro State: Clementino Fraga Filho University Hospital, Hospital Barra D'Or Hospital Copa D'Or, Army Central Hospital and Clinics Hospital Mário Lioni. They were gathered high-resolution CT scans of 15 patients with pulmonary edema hydrostatic origin of various etiologies, evaluated from 2000 to 2005. Ten patients were male and five female. The age at diagnosis ranged from 15 to 90 years, mean 54.7 years and median of 57 years. As for the distribution in terms of age, the highest number of patients was in the fifth decade of life. Of the 15 patients studied in seven edema resulted from chronic cardiovascular diseases, proven by clinical data and improvement after specific treatment for cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Some patients had echocardiographic confirmation through low left ventricular ejection fraction. There were two cases of pulmonary edema secondary to acute myocarditis, diagnosed based on clinical, laboratory and echocardiographic data. Two cases of pulmonary edema resulted from acute valvular disease by mitral chordae rupture, confirmed by transthoracic echocardiography and surgically, one for valvular myxoid change and the other due to acute myocardial infarction, both as an isolated group (acute mitral valve disease). There were two cases of acute myocardial infarction with clinical, laboratory and electrocardiographic. Of the two cases of fibrosing mediastinitis, one was confirmed histologically after open biopsy, secondary histoplasmosis. The second case had no histological confirmation. However, the clinical and epidemiological history was very suggestive of histoplasmosis was done, then diagnosis of presumption. All patients underwent computed tomography in helical devices, as follows: device from Siemens, Somatom Plus 4 in Barra D'Or Hospital; Siemens system, Somatom Balance model, at the University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho and at Hospital Mário Lioni; Toshiba Asteion at the University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho; GE appliance model Light Speed, Hospital Copa D'Or; and Philips Secura, Release 1.3 at the Army Central Hospital. The CT scans were performed with high resolution technique, with a thickness of 1 to 2 mm. In the documentation of the tests appropriate windows were used for lung and in some, the mediastinal window. It was administered through intravenous contrast none of the patients. Complementary ventral decubitus were performed in some patients. The tests were evaluated by two radiologists independently, and the final decisions were taken by consensus. The tests were analyzed for the presence or absence of parenchymal and non-parenchymal alterations, using a pre-established protocol analysis. The patterns were studied: ground-glass opacities, interlobular septal thickening, mosaic paving, peribronchovascular interstitial thickening, consolidation, peribronchial nodules, pleural effusion and vascular caliber. The findings were identified and classified according to the Brazilian Consensus on Terminology Used to Describe Computed tomography of the chest, the Brazilian Society of Thoracic Association, (7) and the Glossary of Terms Fleischner Society.(8) RESULTS The most frequent parenchymal tomographic findings were ground glass opacities (n = 15, 100%), interlobular septal thickening (n = 15, 100%), peribronchovascular thickening (n = 12; 80%) and standard mosaic attenuation (n = 10; 66%). Other less common findings were consolidations (n ​​= 5; 33%) and the air-space nodules (n = 3, 20%). Non parenchymal findings, pleural effusion was the most frequent (n = 13; 87%), followed by increased blood vessel diameter (n = 7, 46%) (Table 1).     Ground-glass opacities and interlobular septal thickening were the most common findings, occurring in 100% of cases (Figures 1 and 2).         Regarding ground-glass opacities in 13 cases had bilateral distribution and only two were unilateral, both in patients with fibrosing mediastinitis affecting the pulmonary veins to the right and, consequently, pulmonary involvement with law. The interlobular septal thickening was bilateral in 13 cases (Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4) and unilaterally in two, also in patients with fibrosing mediastinitis. In all cases the thickening was smooth type.         All cases of interlobular septal thickening (100%) were associated with the presence of ground-glass opacities. However, the pattern mosaic attenuation was observed in only 10 cases (66%) (Figure 1). The peribronchovascular interstitial thickening was observed in 12 cases (80%) and bilateral in 10 (Figure 4) and unilateral in two (cases of fibrosing mediastinitis). The presence of consolidation was an infrequent finding, and was found in only five patients (33%) (Figures 2 and 5). All had bilateral consolidations, In two cases of asymmetric distribution with respect to "bat wing" and predominance in the right upper lobe (chordal rupture cases of mitral valve) (Figure 5).     Nodules airspace were found in three patients (20%), all with ground-glass attenuation and measuring less than 1 cm. Pleural effusion was the third finding more common general tomographic and among non-parenchymal, was the most common, being found in 13 patients (87%), and occurred predominantly bilaterally (n = 11) (Figures 1, 2 and 3). Among the 11 cases of bilateral stroke, nine patients had asymmetric pleural effusion, predominantly on the right. In two cases found pleural effusion only right. Vascular diameter was increased in seven cases (44%) (Figure 3). In two patients with fibrosing mediastinitis, calcified mediastinal masses were observed, causing reduction in the diameter of mediastinal structures, including the right pulmonary veins.   DISCUSSION Pulmonary edema is a common condition, resulting from a number of diseases whose accurate diagnosis is based on well-defined strategies. The literature various discussions and consensus on the clinical diagnosis of pulmonary edema. However, little is on imaging findings, especially those related to computed tomography and, in particular, to high resolution. Currently, there is a more complete classification of pulmonary edema in four types: hydrostatic edema, due to increased permeability with or without diffuse alveolar damage and joint swelling, which is the combination of the two mechanisms (increasing hydrostatic pressure and capillary permeability pulmonary).(1,3) Hydrostatic edema is secondary to elevated capillary hydrostatic pressure, with preservation of the normal selective permeability of the capillary endothelium and alveolar epithelial barriers. The elevation of hydrostatic pressure may be due to obstructive lesions of the pulmonary veins, left atrium or mitral valve, or left ventricular dysfunction, the most common cause reduced left ventricular compliance and increased end diastolic pressure, which is retrogradely transmitted to the pulmonary venous microcirculation.(3.5) Classically recognizes two pathophysiological and radiological phases of hydrostatic pulmonary edema interstitial edema and alveolar edema.(1,3,6,9) The first stage is characterized by interstitial edema, which is secondary to the transudation of fluid from the vascular space into the interstitial space due to increased capillary pressure. With progressive increases in pressure, there is fluid leakage into the alveolar spaces. The fluid within the alveoli is low protein content compared to the plasma, wherein the barrier capillary endothelium remains intact. Radiological alterations derived from increased capillary hydrostatic pressure are divided into three stages: pulmonary vascular congestion, interstitial edema and alveolar edema.(3) There are, however, factors that hinder the correlation between radiological findings and pulmonary capillary pressure levels. It is known that movement of fluid in the pulmonary spaces occurs slowly. Therefore, the hydrostatic pressure may be high, but the radiological findings are not yet evident. The opposite is also true: patients with improvement in pulmonary capillary pressure that has not mobilized the lung fluid will present images of edema and normal blood pressure levels.(1.10) Although pulmonary vascular congestion be the earliest finding, its finding on chest radiography is limited, since it is a subjective assessment and there is the need for proper positioning of the patient in standing position. Your check is made by observing the number and caliber of vessels in the upper lung zones and lower, equidistant from the pulmonary hilum. The use of prior tests for comparison increases the detection of this signal.(3) Computed tomography scan of the arteries and the veins become more caliber and are more easily recognized in perihilar regions where the caliber of the arteries is usually similar to that of their bronchi.(3.9) The second phase of evolution of hydrostatic edema is interstitial edema, which causes thickening peribronchovascular interstitial (centrally drainage of fluid) that on chest radiograph, shows up as a bad definition of pulmonary vessels and apparent thickening of the bronchial walls (peribronchial sheath).(3) Computed tomography scan of the appearance is of bronchial walls thickened and apparent increase in the diameter of the central and peripheral pulmonary vessels.(9) With maintaining the increased interstitial pressure, there is the appearance of interlobular septa which are thickened by liquid infiltration. Another aspect found in interstitial edema is the presence of ground-glass opacities.(1,3,9,11) When the liquid reaches the alveolar space, featuring the last phase of hydrostatic edema (alveolar edema) occurs formation of small nodules or acinar areas that tend to confluence to form free trade consolidations, defined bilateral , predominantly in the central and lower portions of the lungs, probably due to gravitational factor.(1,3) Hydrostatic pulmonary edema that occurs suddenly can present itself as a distinct pattern called "bat wing" or "butterfly wing". The increase in pressure occurs abruptly, with a rapid transition from the first phase (interstitial) to the second (cellular) so that the former is not seen radiologically. This aspect mainly occurs in cases of acute myocardial infarction, chordal rupture or infarction of the papillary muscles and kidney failure.(3,12) can be found associated radiological findings that reinforce the diagnosis of pulmonary edema, the main cardiomegaly and pleural effusion. Heart enlargement is a common radiological finding, because the most frequent cause of hydrostatic pulmonary edema is left ventricular dysfunction. This general finding is absent in hydrostatic edema resulting from pulmonary venous abnormalities pure mitral stenosis, acute myocardial infarction in acute or acute mitral regurgitation.(3) Computed tomography evaluation of cardiac dimensions is defined in the axial planes, the largest diameter perpendicular to the long axis of the cavity. The primary cardiac pulmonary edema is measured in the left atrium, which is defined as the largest transverse axis at the level of the aortic and pulmonary veins emergency, taking as the standard value of 6.6 cm plus or minus the standard deviation 1 cm.(13) Pleural effusion is a common finding, especially in severe cases of hydrostatic pulmonary edema. It is believed that the pleural effusion is more frequent and higher volume on the right. However, you can present to the left or be bilateral.(3) This study evaluated 15 patients with hydrostatic pulmonary edema. Of these, seven had chronic cardiovascular diseases as underlying disease (47%). The other eight patients were classified into four groups, each with two patients: acute myocardial infarction, acute valvular disease with mitral chordae rupture, acute cardiomyopathy and fibrosing mediastinitis due to histoplasmosis, with reduction in the diameter of the pulmonary veins and increased hydrostatic pressure unilaterally . The fibrosing mediastinitis may have several causes, the most common being infection with Histoplasma capsulatum.(14-15) Ground-glass opacities were seen in all 15 patients (100%) and bilateral in 13 cases. Only in two patients with fibrosing mediastinitis the ground-glass opacities were unilateral. In another study (9) were observed ground-glass opacities in six of seven patients with hydrostatic edema. The presence of interlobular septal thickening was a common finding accompanying hydrostatic edema, occurring in 100% of patients, and corresponding to the interstitial via drainage of excess lung fluid. In 13 patients the finding was bilateral (87%), and was unilateral in two (13%). The interlobular septal thickening was smooth in all cases (100%). In another study, (9) of four patients, only one showed nodular, probably due to increase in septal vein diameter. The nodular thickening of interlobular septa is a common finding in a number of diseases, particularly in sarcoidosis and carcinomatous lymphangitis.(16) Septal thickening was not found in isolation. In all cases in which was present also had ground-glass opacities, and in 67% of them configured the appearance of paving tile (10 cases). In another study, (9) interlobular septal thickening was also not seen as an isolated tomographic finding. His presence was closely related to the existence of peribronchovascular interstitial thickening. Among the imaging findings, pleural effusion was one of the most frequently associated with hydrostatic edema, occurring in 13 cases. He was bilateral in 12, being asymmetrical, predominantly on the right, in 10 of them. The association between pleural effusion and hydrostatic edema is consolidated in the literature. Some authors (9) reported pleural effusion in four of seven patients with hydrostatic edema, and most spills was unilateral, right, with just a bilateral case. In our study, only the cases of fibrosing mediastinitis presented unilateral pleural effusion. The peribronchovascular interstitial thickening was seen in 12 patients (80%), and bilateral and smooth in 10 cases. In two cases of fibrosing mediastinitis the peribronchovascular thickening was unilateral. Its identification is made by determining the thickness of the bronchial walls. The presence of peribronchovascular interstitial thickening reflects, in patients with hydrostatic edema, fluid drainage by central interstitial pathways.(3) In another study, (9) the thickening was found in computed tomography scan of four of seven patients. The increase in vascular diameter was identified in seven patients (47%). Some authors (3) consider increased vascular diameter an early finding for hydrostatic edema in the evaluation of chest radiographs. However, their characterization is difficult. CT scan measures the increase in vascular diameter more directly, by comparing the diameter of the vessel with the corresponding bronchus. Other authors (9) also observed an increase in vascular diameter in four of seven patients with hydrostatic edema. Consolidations were seen in only five patients. This fact can be justified by the fact that the vast majority of cases occur in patients with less serious, probably in the interstitial and alveolar stages early pulmonary edema. The appearance of consolidation occurs in the later stages of alveolar edema, when hydrostatic pressure levels increase enough to promote filling the airspaces.(3:19) In another study, (9) no consolidations were identified in hydrostatic edema patients. We observed consolidations with distribution "batwing" in two patients with acute rupture of mitral chordae, one by myxoid degeneration and the other due to acute myocardial infarction. According to some authors, (1) this in "bat wing" appears only in acute cases of hydrostatic pulmonary edema. The appearance of the image is consolidation which saves the periphery of the lungs. In these cases of rupture of the mitral chordae was observed asymmetry consolidation, predominantly in the right upper lobe. Other authors (18) reported four cases of mitral regurgitation with asymmetric edema in the right upper lobe. Still others (19) determined a rate of 9% involvement of the right upper lobe in patients with mitral regurgitation. The regurgitated blood moves to the posterior wall of the left atrium, where the entrance of the right superior pulmonary vein, resulting in more pronounced edema within the region drained by this vein.(18:20) The differential diagnosis of asymmetric pulmonary edema and other diseases that present as pulmonary consolidations is fundamental in therapeutic practice. Tomographic findings consistent with hydrostatic edema (ground-glass opacities and interlobular septal thickening and peribronchovascular interstitial) lung parenchyma that is not consolidated suggests the diagnosis of pulmonary edema.(18) The patients in this study with asymmetrical consolidations predominantly in the upper right lobe also displayed thickening of the interlobular septa and peribronchovascular interstitial, ground-glass opacities, increased caliber of the pulmonary vessels and paving mosaic.(3) Just as the consolidations, the presence of airspace nodes was not significant, occurring in only three cases because they reflect the later alveolar phase of hydrostatic edema. According to some authors, (1) in alveolar edema are formed initially nodular opacities converge to create pulmonary consolidations. One of the difficulties of this study was to compare the findings observed in the tests we studied the literature reports, especially when changes were evaluated as to their extent and characteristics. Studies for pulmonary edema image evaluation have not fully explored the imaging findings, clinical and pathophysiology being the main focus of the discussions. Moreover, due to the characteristics of the disease, no patients underwent lung biopsy, therefore, was not the anatomopathological correlation with imaging findings. Another shortcoming of this study was the small number of cases studied, the inability to drive to the radiology department often severe patients, ventilatory prosthesis, or by the inability of lucid patient to remain supine during the acquisition of images. In this study it was not possible to accurately assess heart volume, since it would be necessary that all patients had study the chest with mediastinal window, which did not happen because it is a retrospective study. Despite the importance of characterizing the tomographic findings of the various types of pulmonary edema, this study did not aim to establish a CT scan of the chest routine or protocol in the diagnosis of pulmonary edema. At present, diagnosis is in most cases based upon clinical data and conventional chest radiography. However, familiarity with tomographic aspects in hydrostatic pulmonary edema is essential to confirm or suggest the diagnosis, and can serve as a parameter for making differential diagnoses.   