ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to use chest HRCT scans to characterize the main pulmonary changes occurring in hydrostatic pulmonary edema cases.
 METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the CT scans of 15 patients with hydrostatic pulmonary edema. The cases were divided into five main etiological groups: congestive heart failure, acute mitral valve disease, acute myocardial infarction, myocarditis and fibrosing mediastinitis. Seven patients were classified in the first group, while the remaining groups comprised two patients each.
 RESULTS: The main findings in these hydrostatic edema cases were: ground-glass opacities (100%), interlobular septal thickening (100%), pleural effusion (87%) and peribronchovascular interstitial thickening (80%).
 Other less common findings included increased blood vessel diameter, consolidations and airspace nodules. CONCLUSION: The predominant pattern found in the patients under study was ground-glass opacities accompanied by interlobular septal thickening (mosaic attenuation pattern) and bilateral pleural effusion (predominantly right-sided).
 Key words: Pulmonary edema; X-ray computed tomography; Pneumopathies INTRODUCTION Pulmonary edema is a common pathological condition that occurs when the rate of interstitial fluid production exceeds the lungs' capacity to eliminate this liquid, thereby resulting in fluid accumulation.
 Pulmonary edema can be caused by increased extravascular fluid production or by the inability to remove the interstitial fluid.(1-4) Pulmonary edema can be classified into four types: hydrostatic edema; increased permeability edema, with or without diffuse alveolar damage; and mixed edema, which is caused by the combination of both mechanisms (increased hydrostatic pressure and increased pulmonary capillary permeability).
(1,3) In this study, only the CT findings related to hydrostatic pulmonary edema were evaluated. Hydrostatic edema is characterized by a transudative mechanism, and heart failure is the most common cause.(1,5) There are other, less frequent causes that lead to pulmonary venous obstruction, which is then accompanied by hydrostatic edema.
(1,3,5) The radiological aspects of hydrostatic edema have been extensively studied, but tomographic findings, especially HRCT findings, have received little attention. Such findings are important for differential diagnosis with other pulmonary diseases, so as to prevent, in some circumstances, unnecessary lung biopsies.
(6) CT findings described in the current literature are similar to those seen in other pulmonary diseases.
 Therefore, including pulmonary edema in the differential diagnosis may, in these cases, help clinicians reach an accurate final diagnosis. This study aims to describe pulmonary changes in the hydrostatic edema as observed on chest HRCT scans.
   METHODS A retrospective study was conducted based on radiology files from five medical institutions located in the state of Rio de Janeiro: Clementino Fraga Filho University Hospital, Barra D'Or Hospital, Copa D'Or Hospital, Central Army Hospital and Mário Lioni Clinical Hospital.
 The research collected chest HRCT scans of 15 patients with multi-etiological hydrostatic pulmonary edema, assessed from 2000 to 2005.
 10 patients were male and 5 were female. The age at diagnosis ranged from 15 to 90 years, with a mean of 54.7 and a median of 57.
 As for age distribution, there were more patients in their fifties than in any other age bracket. In 7 of the 15 patients under study, the edema resulted from chronic acquired cardiovascular diseases, confirmed by clinical data and with improvement after specific treatment for cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
 In some patients, the confirmation was made through echocardiography (low left ventricular ejection fraction). 
 There were two cases of pulmonary edema caused by acute myocarditis, the diagnosis of which was based on clinical, laboratory and echocardiographic data.
 Two cases of pulmonary edema resulted from acute valvular disease (rupture of the mitral valve chordae), confirmed through transthoracic echocardiography and surgery; one due to valvular myxoid change and the other due to acute myocardial infarction, both of which classified into an isolated group (acute mitral valve disease).
 There were two cases of acute myocardial infarction, diagnosed through clinical, laboratory and electrocardiographic data.
 One of the two cases of fibrosing mediastinitis was confirmed histologically after an open biopsy, showing that it was secondary to histoplasmosis.
 The second case had no histological confirmation. However, the clinical and epidemiological history was strongly suggestive of histoplasmosis, and therefore a presumptive diagnosis was made.
 All patients underwent chest CT scans in helical devices, viz: Siemens Somaton Plus 4 (Barra D'Or Hospital); Siemens Somatom Balance (Clementino Fraga Filho University Hospital and Mário Lioni Clinical Hospital); Toshiba Asteion (Clementino Fraga Filho University Hospital); GE Light Speed (Copa D'Or Hospital); and Philips Secura Release 1.3 (Central Army Hospital).
 CT scans were performed using the high-resolution technique, with 1 or 2 mm thick slices.
 Appropriate lung windows and, in some cases, mediastinal windows were used in the documentation of the tests..
 No venous contrast medium was administered to the patients.  Complementary ventral decubitus slices were acquired in some patients.
 Two radiologists evaluated the tests independently, and the final decisions were taken by consensus. Using a pre-established analysis protocol, the tests were analyzed for the presence or absence of parenchymal or nonparenchymal alterations. 
 The following patterns were studied: ground-glass opacities, interlobular septal thickening, mosaic attenuation pattern, peribronchovascular interstitial thickening, consolidation, airspace nodules, pleural effusion and vascular caliber.
 The findings were identified and classified according to the Brazilian Thoracic Society's Consensus on Chest CT Descriptors (7) and the Fleischner Society's Glossary of Terms.
(8) RESULTS The most common CT findings in the parenchyma were: ground glass opacities (n = 15; 100%), interlobular septal thickening (n = 15; 100%), peribronchovascular thickening (n = 12; 80%) and mosaic attenuation pattern (n = 10; 66%).
 Other, less common, findings were: consolidations (n = 5; 33%) and airspace nodules (n = 3, 20%). As for nonparenchymal findings, pleural effusion was the most frequent (n = 13; 87%), followed by increased blood vessel diameter (n = 7, 46%) (Table 1).
     Ground-glass opacities and interlobular septal thickening were the most common findings, occurring in 100% of the cases (Figures 1 and 2).
         As for ground-glass opacities, 13 cases had bilateral distribution and only 2 were unilateral - both of which in patients with fibrosing mediastinitis affecting the pulmonary veins to the right and, consequently, impairing the function of the right lung.
 Interlobular septal thickening was bilateral in 13 cases (Figures 1, 2, 3, 4) and unilateral in 2 cases, also in patients with fibrosing mediastinitis.
 In all cases, the thickening was smooth.         All cases of interlobular septal thickening (100%) were associated with the presence of ground-glass opacities. However, only 10 cases (66%) revealed a mosaic attenuation pattern (Figure 1).
 Peribronchovascular interstitial thickening was observed in 12 cases (80%); it was bilateral in 10 cases (Figure 4) and unilateral in 2 (fibrosing mediastinitis cases).
 The presence of consolidation was an infrequent finding: it was found in only 5 patients (33%) (Figures 2 and 5).
 All patients had bilateral consolidations. In two cases, consolidations revealed an asymmetric distribution with a "bat wing" appearance and right upper lobe predominance (cases of mitral valve chordae rupture) (Figure 5).     Airspace nodules were found in 3 patients (20%), all with ground-glass attenuation and measuring less than 1 cm.
 Pleural effusion was the third most common CT finding overall. It was also the most frequent nonparenchymal finding, being found in 13 patients (87%) and revealing a bilateral predominance (n = 11) (Figures 1, 2 and 3).

 9 of the 11 bilateral effusion cases presented asymmetric pleural effusion, predominantly to the right. In two cases, pleural effusion was found only on the right side.
 Increased vascular diameter was found in 7 cases (44%) (Image 3). Calcified mediastinal masses were observed in two fibrosing mediastinitis patients, causing a reduction in the diameter of mediastinal structures, including right pulmonary veins.
   DISCUSSION Pulmonary edema is a common condition resulting from a number of diseases, and its accurate diagnosis is based on well-defined strategies.
 The literature offers various discussions and consensuses on the clinical diagnosis of pulmonary edema.
 Imaging findings, however, have received little attention, especially when related to chest CT scans, and HRCT scans in particular.
 Pulmonary edema is currently classified according to a more complete fourfold taxonomy: hydrostatic edema; increased permeability edema, with or without diffuse alveolar damage; and mixed edema, which is caused by the combination of both mechanisms (increased hydrostatic pressure and increased pulmonary capillary permeability).
(1,3) Hydrostatic edema is secondary to increased capillary hydrostatic pressure, with the preservation of the normal selective permeability of the capillary endothelium and alveolar epithelial barriers.
 Increased hydrostatic pressure can result from obstructive lesions in the pulmonary veins, left atrium or mitral valve, or from left ventricular dysfunction; the most common cause is reduced left ventricular compliance and increased end-diastolic pressure, which is retrogradely transmitted to the pulmonary venous microcirculation.
(3,5) Two pathophysiological and radiological stages of hydrostatic pulmonary edema are normally recognized: interstitial edema and alveolar edema.
(1,3,6,9) The first stage is characterized by interstitial edema, which is secondary to the transudation of fluid from the vascular space into the interstitium, due to increased capillary pressure. 
 With pressure increase progression, fluid leaks into the alveolar spaces. The protein content of alveolar fluid is lower than that of plasma, and the capillary endothelial barrier remains intact.
 Radiological alterations resulting from increased hydrostatic capillary pressure are divided into three stages: pulmonary vascular congestion, interstitial edema and alveolar edema.
(3) There are, however, factors that make it difficult to establish a correlation between radiological findings and pulmonary capillary pressure levels.
 It is known that the movement of fluid in pulmonary spaces occurs slowly. Therefore, hydrostatic pressure may be high even if radiological findings are not evident.
 The opposite is also true: patients who present pulmonary capillary pressure improvement might not have yet mobilized the pulmonary fluid, and will therefore present edema images with normal pressure levels.(1.10) Although pulmonary vascular congestion is the earliest finding, its finding on chest X-rays is limited, since it is a subjective assessment and there is the need for appropriate orthostatic positioning of the patient.
 It is identified by observing the number and caliber of vessels in the upper and lower lung regions, equidistant from the pulmonary hilum.
 A comparison with prior tests increases the detection of this signal.(3) In HRCT scans, increased caliber makes it easier to recognize arteries and veins in the  perihilar regions, where arterial caliber is usually similar to that of the respective bronchi.
(3.9) The second stage in the evolution of the hydrostatic edema is interstitial edema, which causes peribronchovascular interstitial thickening (central fluid drainage); on chest X-rays, the latter manifests as poorly defined pulmonary vessels and apparent thickening of the bronchial walls (peribronchial sheath).
(3) HRCT scans show thickened bronchial walls and an apparent increase in the diameter of central and peripheral pulmonary vessels.
(9) Thickened by fluid infiltration, interlobular septa appear when interstitial pressure remains high.
 Another aspect of the interstitial edema is the presence of ground-glass opacities.(1,3,9,11) When the fluid reaches the alveolar space, characterizing the last stage of the hydrostatic edema (alveolar edema), small nodules or acinar areas are formed. These tend to converge, forming pronounced, defined and bilateral consolidations, which, probably due to gravitational factors, are predominantly found in the central and lower regions of the lungs.
(1,3) Sudden hydrostatic pulmonary edemas can manifest in the form of a unique pattern known as "bat wing" or "butterfly wing" pattern. Pressure levels increase abruptly, with a rapid transition from the first stage (interstitial) to the second (alveolar), and therefore the first stage is not seen radiologically.
 This aspect occurs mainly in cases of acute myocardial infarction, chordal rupture or papillary muscle infarction and kidney failure.
(3,12) Related radiological findings that reinforce the pulmonary edema diagnosis can be found, cardiomegaly and pleural effusion being the main ones.
 Cardiomegaly is a common radiological finding, since the most frequent cause of hydrostatic pulmonary edema is left ventricular dysfunction.
 This finding is usually absent when the hydrostatic edema results from pulmonary venous abnormalities, pure mitral stenosis, acute myocardial infarction or acute mitral regurgitation.(3) In HRCT scans, the evaluation of cardiac dimensions is defined on the axial planes, at the largest diameter perpendicular to the long axis of the cavity.
 The main cardiac measurement in the pulmonary edema is that of the left atrium, which is defined as the largest transverse axis at the level of the pulmonary veins and aortic emergency, taking ±6.6 cm and the standard deviation of 1 cm as normal.
(13) Pleural effusion is a common finding, especially in severe hydrostatic pulmonary edema cases. It is believed that right-sided pleural effusion is more frequent and voluminous.
 However, pleural effusion can also be left-sided or bilateral.(3) This study evaluated 15 patients with hydrostatic pulmonary edema.
 Of these, 7 (47%) had chronic acquired cardiovascular diseases as the underlying disease (47%). The remaining 8 patients were classified into four groups, each with two patients: acute myocardial infarction, acute valvular disease with mitral chordae rupture, acute cardiomyopathy and fibrosing mediastinitis due to histoplasmosis, accompanied by reduced pulmonary vein diameter and increased unilateral hydrostatic pressure.
 Fibrosing mediastinitis may have several causes; however, the most common cause is infection with Histoplasma capsulatum.(14-15) Ground-glass opacities were detected in all 15 patients (100%); in 13 cases, they were bilateral.
 Only the two patients with fibrosing mediastinitis presented unilateral ground-glass opacities. In another study (9), ground-glass opacities were detected in 6 out of 7 hydrostatic edema patients. Interlobular septal thickening was a common finding associated with hydrostatic edema, occurring in 100% of the patients and corresponding to the interstitial pathway for the drainage of excess lung fluid.
 The finding was bilateral in 13 patients (87%), and unilateral in 2 (13%).
 Interlobular septal thickening was smooth in all cases (100%). In another study (9) involving four patients, only one presented a nodular appearance, probably due to an increase in septal vein diameter. Nodular thickening of the interlobular septa is a common finding in several diseases, particularly in sarcoidosis and carcinomatous lymphangitis.(16) Septal thickening was not found in isolation. Ground-glass opacities were detected in all patients presenting septal thickening, whereas a mosaic attenuation pattern was observed in 10 cases (67%).
 In another study, (9) interlobular septal thickening was also not observed as an isolated CT finding. Its presence was closely related with peribronchovascular interstitial thickening. Pleural effusion was one of the image findings most frequently associated with hydrostatic edema, occurring in 13 cases.
 It was bilateral in 12, presenting an asymmetrical, predominantly right-sided distribution in 10 patients.
 The association between pleural effusion and hydrostatic edema has been well established in the literature. Some authors (9) reported pleural effusion in 4 of 7 patients with hydrostatic edema; most cases presented a unilateral, right-sided distribution, and only 1 patient presented bilateral effusion.
 In our study, only the cases of fibrosing mediastinitis presented unilateral pleural effusion. Peribronchovascular interstitial thickening was observed in 12 patients (80%); in 10 cases, it was bilateral and smooth.
 In the two cases of fibrosing mediastinitis, peribronchovascular thickening was unilateral; it was identified by the apparent thickness of the bronchial walls. In hydrostatic edema patients, the presence of peribronchovascular interstitial thickening reflects the draining of the fluid via central interstitial pathways.
(3) In another study, (9) the thickening was detected in the HRCT scans of 4 out of 7 patients. Increased vascular diameter was found in 7 cases (47%). Some authors (3) consider increased vascular diameter an early hydrostatic edema finding in the evaluation of chest X-rays.
 However, its characterization is difficult. CT scans offer a more direct approach to vascular diameter measurement by comparing the diameter of the vessel with the corresponding bronchus.
 Other authors (9) have also observed vascular diameter increase in 4 of their 7 hydrostatic edema patients.
 Consolidations were observed in only 5 patients. This can be explained by the fact that the vast majority of such cases occurred in less severe patients, probably during the early interstitial and alveolar stages of the pulmonary edema. Consolidations emerge during the later stages of the alveolar edema, when hydrostatic pressure levels increase enough to stimulate the filling of airspaces.
(3, 19) In another study, (9) no consolidations were identified in hydrostatic edema patients. We observed "bat wing" consolidations in two patients with acute mitral chordae rupture, one due to myxoid degeneration and the other due to acute myocardial infarction.
 According to some authors, (1) this "bat wing" distribution is seen only in acute cases of hydrostatic pulmonary edema. The image indicates consolidation sparing the periphery of the lungs.
 In these mitral chordae rupture cases, consolidation was asymmetric and predominantly found in the right upper lobe.
 Other authors (18) reported 4 cases of mitral regurgitation with asymmetric edema in the right upper lobe. Still other authors (19) found that the frequency of upper right lobe involvement in patients with mitral regurgitation was 9%. 
 Regurgitated blood moves to the posterior wall of the left atrium, where the entrance to the upper right pulmonary vein is located, resulting in a more pronounced edema in the region drained by this vein.(18:20) The differential diagnosis of asymmetric pulmonary edema and other diseases that manifest as pulmonary consolidations is fundamental in therapeutic practice. CT findings that are consistent with hydrostatic edema (ground-glass opacities, interlobular septal thickening and peribronchovascular interstitium thickening) in the unconsolidated lung parenchyma suggest the diagnosis of pulmonary edema.(18) In this study, patients with asymmetrical consolidations predominantly located in the upper right lobe also presented interlobular septa thickening, peribronchovascular interstitial thickening, ground-glass opacities, increased pulmonary vascular caliber, and mosaic attenuation.

(3) As was found for consolidations, the presence of airspace nodules was not significant, occurring in only three cases; this is due to the fact that such nodules reflect the (later) alveolar stage of hydrostatic edema.
 According to some authors, (1) nodular opacities are formed in the alveolar edema at an early stage and converge to create pulmonary consolidations. One of the challenges in this study was to compare the findings of the tests we studied with the data available in the literature, especially when changes were assessed as to their extent and characteristics.
 Studies in which pulmonary edema images are evaluated have not fully explored the imaging aspects, focusing the discussion on clinical and physiopathological factors.
 Moreover, due to the specificities of the disease, none of the patients underwent lung biopsy, and therefore it was not possible to establish anatomopathological correlations with imaging findings. Another shortcoming of this study was the small number of cases studied: since patients were often in a critical condition, and on ventilatory support, it was not always possible to take them to the radiology department; moreover, some patients, although lucid, were unable to lay in dorsal decubitus during the image acquisition process.
 It was not possible to accurately assess heart volumetries, because it would require that all cases included a chest study with mediastinal window, which did not happen due to the retrospective nature of this study.
 Despite the importance of characterizing CT findings pertaining to the various types of pulmonary edema, the purpose of this study was not to establish chest CT scans as a routine or protocol in the diagnosis of pulmonary edema.
 Diagnosis is usually based on clinical data and conventional chest X-rays.

However, familiarity with tomographic aspects in hydrostatic pulmonary edema is essential to either confirming or suggesting a diagnosis and can also serve as a parameter for making the differential diagnosis.
 However, familiarity with the tomographic aspects of hydrostatic pulmonary edema is crucial to confirm or suggest a diagnosis, and it can also serve as a parameter for differential diagnoses.
   