 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: THE purpose of this study was to characterize by means of high resolution computed tomography of the chest the main pulmonary changes the pulmonary edema hydrostatic. METHODS: we analyzed, retrospectively, the ct scans of fifteen patients with clinical picture of pulmonary edema hydrostatic, divided into five main groups etiological: congestive heart failure, valvulopathy, mitral acute, acute myocardial infarction, myocarditis, and mediastinitis fibrosante, having been seven patients classified in the first group and two in each of the other. RESULTS: The major findings of edema, hydrostatic were glass opacities (100%), thickening of the septa interlobulares (100%), pleural effusion (87%) and thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular (80%). Other findings least common were the increase in the size of vessels, consolidations, and nodules of the airspace. CONCLUSION: THE predominant pattern found in the patients studied was glass opacities and associated thickening of the septa interlobulares (standard of pavement in mosaic), with pleural effusion bilateral, prevalent on the right. Descriptors: pulmonary Edema; Ct scan x-ray; pulmonary disease INTRODUCTION pulmonary Edema is a pathological condition frequent and occurs when the rate of production of interstitial fluid exceeds the capacity of the lung for elimination of this liquid, leading to a buildup of the same. The pulmonary edema can be a result of increased production extravascular fluid of, or the inability of the withdrawal of the interstitial liquid. (1-4) The pulmonary edema can be classified into four types: edema hydrostatic edema by increased permeability, with or without damage to the alveolar diffuse, and swelling of the joint, which is the association of the two mechanisms (increased hydrostatic pressure and capillary permeability in lung). (1,3) in This study we evaluated only the findings of ct of pulmonary edema hydrostatic. The edema hydrostatic is characterized by a mechanism transudativo and heart failure is the most common cause. (1,5) There are other causes, but at a lower prevalence, that lead to obstructions in the venous pulmonary and evolve with oedema, hydrostatic. (1,3,5) The aspects of radiological edema hydrostatic have been extensively studied, but the findings of ct, especially high resolution, have been little explored, and their knowledge is important for the differential diagnosis with other lung diseases, to avoid, in some circumstances, the realization of biopsies, lung unnecessary. (6) The ct scan findings but currently described in the literature are similar to those present in other lung diseases. Soon, the insertion of pulmonary edema in the differential diagnosis in these cases can provide grants to the clinician to the final diagnosis correct. This study aimed to describe the changes in pulmonary in edema hydrostatic observed in high resolution computed tomography of the thorax. METHODS Was conducted a retrospective study, based on research of files radiology the five medical institutions of the State of Rio de Janeiro, University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho, Hospital Barra D'or, Hospital Copa D'or, Central Hospital of the Army and the Hospital de Clínicas Mário Lioni. Were collected ct scans of high resolution of the chest of 15 patients with pulmonary edema source hydrostatic of various etiologies, evaluated in the period from 2000 to 2005. Ten patients were male and five female. The age, at the time of diagnosis, ranged from 15 to 90 years, with an average of 54,7 years and a median of 57 years. As to the distribution in relation to age group, the greatest number of patients was in the fifth decade of life. Of the 15 patients studied, seven of the edema was due to acquired heart diseases chronic, proven by clinical data and with improvement after specific treatment for pulmonary edema cardiogenic. Some patients had confirmation echocardiographic, through low ejection fraction of the left ventricle. There were two cases of pulmonary edema secondary to acute myocarditis, with diagnosis based on clinical data, laboratory and echocardiographic. Two cases of pulmonary edema were the result of valvulopathy, acute rupture of chordae to the mitral, confirmed with transthoracic and surgically, one-by-change mixomatosa valve and the other due to acute myocardial infarction, both of which are classified in an isolated group (valvulopathy, acute). There were two cases of acute myocardial infarction with clinical diagnosis, laboratory and eletrocardiográfico. Among the two cases of mediastinitis fibrosante, a obtained histological confirmation after biopsy, the open sky, being secondary to histoplasmosis. The second case had no histological confirmation. However, the history of the clinical-epidemiological was very suggestive of histoplasmosis, having been done, then, the diagnosis of presumption. All the patients underwent computed tomography of the chest in appliances, helical, and they are: appliance brand Siemens, model Somaton Plus 4, at the Hospital Barra D'or; machine Siemens model Somatom Balance, in the University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho, and Hospital de Clínicas Mário Lioni; device Toshiba model Asteion, at the University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho; appliance GE, model Light Speed, in the Hospital Copa D'or; and the instrument Philips, model Dryness Release 1.3, at the Central Hospital of the Army. The ct scans were performed with the technique of high resolution with a slice thickness of 1 and 2 mm. In the documentation of the examinations were used windows appropriate to the lung and, in some, the window to the mediastinum. Was not administered contrast medium venous in any of the patients. Cuts complementary in prone position were performed in some patients. The exams were evaluated by two radiologists independently, and the final decisions were obtained by consensus. The scans were analyzed as to the presence or absence of changes in parenchymal and non-parenchymal, using a protocol pre-established analysis. The patterns studied were: - glass opacities, thickening of septa interlobulares, paving, mosaic, thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular, consolidation, nodules, airspace, pleural effusion and caliber of the vascular. The findings were identified and classified according to the Brazilian Consensus on the Terminology of the Descriptors Computed Tomography of the Thorax, of the Brazilian Society of Pulmonology and Tuberculosis,(7) and the Glossary of Terms of the Society Fleischner. (8) the RESULTS of The ct scan findings but parenquimatosos the most frequent were: - glass opacities (n = 15; 100%), thickening of septa interlobulares (n = 15; 100%), thickening peribroncovascular (n = 12; 80%) and pattern of pavement in mosaic (n = 10; 66%). Other findings least common were the consolidations (n = 5; 33%) and nodules of the air space (n = 3; 20%). The findings do not parenquimatosos, the pleural effusion was the most frequent (n = 13; 87%), followed by the increase in the diameter of the vessels (n = 7; 46%) (Table 1). - Glass opacities and thickening of septa interlobulares were the findings of the most common, occurring in 100% of cases (Figures 1 and 2). With respect to the-glass opacities in 13 cases had distribution bilateral, and only two were unilateral, both in patients with mediastinitis fibrosante compromising the pulmonary veins to the right and, consequently, with pulmonary involvement the right. The thickening of the septa interlobulares occurred bilaterally in 13 cases (Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4) and unilaterally in two, also in patients with mediastinitis fibrosante. In all cases, the thickening was of the flat type. All cases of thickening of the septa interlobulares (100%) were associated with the presence of glass opacities. However, the pattern of pavement in mosaic was observed only in 10 cases (66%) (Figure 1). The thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular was observed in 12 cases (80%), being bilateral in 10 (Figure 4), and unilateral in two of them (cases of mediastinitis fibrosante). The presence of consolidation was a finding less common, having been found in only five patients (33%) (Figures 2 and 5). All had consolidations, bilateral, and in two of them skewed distribution, with the appearance in the "bat-wing" and the predominance in upper lobe right (cases of rupture of the chordae of the mitral valve) (Figure 5). Nodules of airspace have been found in three patients (20%), all with attenuation in frosted glass and measuring less than 1 cm. Pleural effusion was the third finding of ct general more common, and among the not parenquimatosos, was the most frequent, having been found in 13 patients (87%), and occurred predominantly bilaterally (n = 11) (Figures 1, 2 and 3). Among the 11 cases of stroke, bilateral, nine patients had pleural effusion asymmetrical, with predominance to the right. In two cases it was found pleural effusion only to the right. The caliber vascular showed increased in seven cases (44%) (Figure 3). In the two patients with mediastinitis fibrosante, were observed masses mediastinais calcified, causing a reduction of the caliber of the structures mediastinais, including of the right pulmonary veins. DISCUSSION pulmonary edema is a condition frequent, due to numerous diseases, whose correct diagnosis is based on well-defined strategies. There are in the literature several discussions and consensus on the clinical diagnosis of oedema of the lungs. However, little is about the findings of the image, especially when related to computed tomography of the thorax and, in particular, to high resolution. Currently, there is a classification more complete, pulmonary edema in four types: edema hydrostatic edema by increased permeability, with or without damage to the alveolar diffuse, and swelling of the joint, which is the association of the two mechanisms (increased hydrostatic pressure and capillary permeability in lung). (1,3) The edema hydrostatic is secondary to elevations in hydrostatic pressure in the capillary, with the preservation of permeability normal selective of the capillary endothelium and the barriers of the epithelium alveolar. The elevation of the hydrostatic pressure can be due to obstructive lesions of pulmonary veins, left atrium, or mitral valve, or left ventricular dysfunction, being the most common cause of the reduced compliance of the left ventricle and increase of diastolic pressure end, that is transmitted retrogradamente up the microcirculation of the venous pulmonary. (3.5-inch) Classically recognized two phases physiopathological and radiological of pulmonary edema hydrostatic: edema interstitial edema alveolar. (1,3,6,9) The first phase is characterized by edema and interstitial, that is secondary to transudação fluid space vascular to the interstitium due to increased capillary pressure. With the progression of the increase in blood pressure, there is leakage of liquid to the spaces alveolar. The fluid in the interior of the alveoli is low protein content when compared to the plasma, and the barrier of the capillary endothelium remains intact. The radiological changes derived from the increase of the capillary pressure hydrostatic are divided into three stages: congestion vascular pulmonary edema interstitial edema alveolar. (3) There are, however, factors that hinder the correlation between the radiological findings and blood pressure levels pulmonary capillaries. It is known that the movement of fluid in the spaces of the lungs makes it slow. Soon, the hydrostatic pressure may be high, but the radiologic findings are not yet evident. The opposite is also true: patients with improvement in blood pressure levels pulmonary capillaries that have not yet mobilized the liquid lung will present images of edema with the blood pressure levels normal. (1,10) in Spite of the congestion of the pulmonary vascular to be found more early, your observation in the chest x-rays is limited, since it is a subjective assessment and there is a need for a proper positioning of the patient, in ortostase. Your verification is done by observing the number and size of vessels in areas of the lung top and the bottom, equidistant from the hilum of the lung. The use of examinations prior to the comparison, increases the detection of this signal. (3) In high resolution computed tomography, the arteries and the veins become more large caliber and are more easily recognized in the regions perihilares, where the calibre of the arteries is usually similar to that of their respective bronchi. (3,9) The second phase of the evolution of edema, hydrostatic is the interstitial edema caused, which causes the thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular (the central form of drainage of the fluid) that, on the x-ray of the chest shows up as a bad definition of the pulmonary vessels and the apparent thickening of the bronchial walls (hem peribrônquica). (3) In high resolution computed tomography the appearance is of bronchial walls thickened, and the apparent increase in the caliber of pulmonary vessels in the central and peripheral. (9) With the maintenance of the increased pressure the interstitial, there is the appearance of the septa interlobulares, that are thickened by infiltration of liquid. Another aspect found in the interstitial edema caused is the presence of-glass opacities. (1,3,9,11) When the liquid reaches the space cellular, featuring the last phase of the edema, hydrostatic (edema alveolar), occurs the formation of small nodules or areas acinares that tend to confluence, to form consolidations, tax-free, defined, and bilateral, predominating in portions of the central and lower lungs, likely factor gravitational. (1,3) pulmonary Edema hydrostatic that occurs sudden can present itself as a distinct pattern called the "bat-wing" or "butterfly wing". The increase in blood pressure occurs abruptly, with rapid passage of the first phase (interstitial) to the second (alveolar), so that the first is not seen using radiological guidance. This aspect occurs mainly in cases of acute myocardial infarction, rupture of chordae or myocardial muscles, papillary, and renal failure. (3,12) Can be found radiological findings associated with them, reinforcing the diagnosis of pulmonary edema, the major ones being cardiomegaly and pleural effusion. The cardiomegaly is a finding in radiological usual, because the most frequent cause of pulmonary edema hydrostatic is the left ventricular dysfunction. This finding is usually absent when edema hydrostatic is due to venous abnormalities pulmonary, pure mitral stenosis, acute myocardial infarction in the acute phase or mitral regurgitation acute. (3) In the computerized tomography of the thorax the assessment of the dimensions of the heart is defined in the plans, axial, in the largest diameter perpendicular to the long axis of the cavity. The main measure heart in the pulmonary edema is the left atrium, which is defined as the largest axis transverse to the level of the pulmonary veins and of the emergency aortic, taking as normal value of 6.6 cm more or less with the standard deviation of 1 cm. (13) The pleural effusion is a finding frequent, especially in the severe cases of pulmonary edema hydrostatic. It is believed that the pleural effusion is more frequent and of greater volume on the right. However, it can present itself to the left or be bilateral. (3) in This study were evaluated in 15 patients with pulmonary edema hydrostatic. Of these, seven had underlying disease acquired heart diseases chronic (47%). The other eight patients were classified into four groups, each of which with two patients: acute myocardial infarction, valvulopathy, acute rupture of chordae to the mitral, cardiomyopathy and acute mediastinitis fibrosante for histoplasmosis, with a reduction of the caliber of the pulmonary veins and increased hydrostatic pressure unilaterally. Mediastinitis fibrosante can have various causes, the most frequent infection by Histoplasma capsulatum. (14-15) - glass Opacities were seen in all 15 patients (100%), being bilateral in 13 cases. Only in the two patients with mediastinitis fibrosante the-glass opacities were unilateral. In another study(9) were observed-glass opacities in six of seven patients with edema hydrostatic. The presence of thickening of the septa interlobulares was a common finding, associated with oedema, hydrostatic, occurring in 100% of patients, and corresponds to the via the interstitial drainage of excess lung fluid. In 13 patients the finding was bilateral (87%), and in two it was unilateral (13%). The thickening of the septa interlobulares had look smooth in all cases (100%). In another study(9) of the four patients, only one showed appearance nodular, likely to increase in the diameter of veins septal. The thickening nodular of the septa interlobulares is a finding common in a number of diseases, particularly in sarcoidosis and in linfangite other side effects. (16) The thickening nasal septum was not found in isolation. In all cases in which it was present there also-glass opacities, and in 67% of them amounted to the appearance in the pavement in mosaic (10 cases). In another study,(9) the thickening septal interlobular also has not been observed as a finding in ct isolated. Its presence was closely related to the existence of thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular. Among the findings of the image, the pleural effusion was one of the most frequently associated with edema, hydrostatic, occurring in 13 cases. It was bilateral in 12, being asymmetrical, with predominance to the right, in 10 of them. The association between pleural effusion and edema hydrostatic is consolidated in the literature. Some authors(9) reported pleural effusion in four of seven patients with edema, hydrostatic, with the majority of the spills was unilateral, on the right, with only one case of bilateral. In our study, only the cases of mediastinitis fibrosante showed pleural effusion unilateral. The thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular was seen in 12 patients (80%), being bilateral and smooth in 10 cases. In the two cases of mediastinitis fibrosante the thickening peribroncovascular was one-sided. Their identification is made by the apparent increased thickness of the bronchial walls. The presence of thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular reflects, in patients with oedema, hydrostatic, the drainage of the liquid by way interstitial central. (3) In another study,(9) the thickening was found on high resolution computed tomography in four of seven patients. The increase in the diameter of the vascular was identified in seven patients (47%). Some authors(3) consider the increase in the diameter of the vascular a found early in the edema hydrostatic, in the evaluation of chest x-rays. However, its characterization is difficult. The tomography allows to measure the increase in diameter of the vascular in a more direct fashion, by comparing the diameter of the vessel with the brônquio corresponding. Other authors(9) have also observed increase in the diameter of the vascular in four of its seven patients with edema hydrostatic. The consolidations were seen in only five patients. This fact can be justified by the fact the vast majority of cases being patients with lower gravity, probably in the early stages interstitial and alveolar of early pulmonary edema. The onset of consolidations occur in the later stages of the edema alveolar, when the blood pressure levels hydrostatic rise enough to promote the filling of the air spaces. (3,19) In another study(9) were not identified in the consolidations in patients with oedema, hydrostatic. We observe consolidations with distribution in the "bat-wing" in two patients with rupture acute chordae to the mitral, one by degeneration mixomatosa and the other for acute myocardial infarction. According to some authors,(1) this appearance in the "bat-wing" only appears in acute cases of pulmonary edema hydrostatic. The aspect ratio of the image is consolidation on the periphery of the lungs. In these cases of rupture of chordae to the mitral was the observed asymmetry of the consolidation, predominantly in the upper lobe right. Other authors(18) reported four cases of mitral regurgitation with edema, asymmetrical, the upper lobe right. Still others(19) have determined a frequency of 9% of lesions upper lobe right in reflux patients the mitral. The blood reflowable directs to the posterior wall of the left atrium, where is the entrance of the right superior pulmonary vein, determining edema more marked in the territory drained by this vein. (18,20) The differential diagnosis of pulmonary edema asymmetrical with other diseases that present as consolidations of the lungs is crucial for driving the therapeutic. The presence of ct scan findings but compatible with oedema, hydrostatic (glass opacities and thickening of septa interlobulares and the interstitium peribroncovascular) in the lung parenchyma that is not consolidated, suggests the diagnosis of pulmonary edema. (18) The patients in this study with consolidations, asymmetric, predominantly in the upper lobe right also showed thickening of septa interlobulares and the interstitium peribroncovascular, glass opacities, increased caliber of the pulmonary vessels and the paving tile. (3) in The same way that the consolidations, the presence of nodules, airspace was not significant, occurring in only three cases, because they reflect the stage alveolar later edema hydrostatic. According to some authors,(1) in edema in the alveolar form, initially, opacities nodular that converge to lead to consolidations of the lungs. One of the difficulties of this work was the comparison of the findings observed in the examinations we studied the reports from the literature, mainly when the changes were assessed as to extent and its characteristics. Studies conducted for the assessment of image of pulmonary edema do not exploit properly the aspects of the image, being the clinical and pathophysiology, the main focus of the discussions. Furthermore, due to the particular characteristics of the disease, no patient was submitted to pulmonary biopsy and, therefore, it was not possible the correlation anatomopatológica with the findings of the image. Another deficiency of this study was the small number of cases studied, due to the impossibility of conducting the service of radiology patients often severe, in use of prostheses, ventilatory, or by the inability of the patient to lucid to remain supine during the acquisition of the images. In this study it was not possible to properly assess the heart volume, as it would be necessary for all patients to present study of the thorax with a window to the mediastinum, which did not occur for the case of a retrospective study. Despite the importance of characterizing the ct scan findings but of the various types of pulmonary edema, this work had as objective to establish the examination ct of the chest as routine or protocol in the diagnosis of pulmonary edema. At the present time, the diagnosis is most often based on clinical data and x-ray conventional chest. However, the familiarity with the aspects of ct of pulmonary edema hydrostatic is essential to confirm or suggest the diagnosis, in addition to being able to serve as a parameter for the development of differential diagnoses. 