SUMMARY coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is a well established procedure with current precise indications. The advent and spread of this technique was possible after the introduction of the coronary angiogram. Although many evaluation methods have evolved in recent years, none could replace the invasive coronary angiogram as a pre-operative examination. Computed tomography (CT) has emerged as an alternative to invasive coronary angiogram. This report describes two cases of CRM conducted using only CT and anatomical evaluation technique of preoperative coronary arteries. Keywords: Coronary Angiography, Coronary Artery Bypass, Emission Computed Tomography.     The foundation coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is a well established procedure with current precise indications. The advent and spread of this technique was possible after the introduction of the coronary angiogram by Sones1. The technique allowed the accurate identification of coronary stenosis and thus correct placement of the graft. Although many evaluation methods have been developed in recent years, many of them non-invasive, so far none of them could replace the invasive coronary angiogram as a preoperative examination, providing accurate information about the topography of the coronary vessels in order to be carried the CRM. Recently, computed tomography angiography (CTA), especially the 64-channel, emerged as an alternative to invasive coronary angiogram with high sensitivity, specificity and high predictive values ​​compared to the standard method of ouro2. The main focus of the method, regarding cardiac surgery, is evaluating the patency of the anastomosis. So far, there is no CRM reports carried out using only the CT as the only preoperative form of coronary angiogram. This report describes two cases of CRM conducted using only CT and anatomical evaluation of preoperative technique of coronary arteries.   Case reports Case 1 A 68-year-old man with stable angina and presenting numerous risk factors (smoking, hypertension, high serum cholesterol levels and physical inactivity) was admitted in our hospital for a routine evaluation. The non-invasive stress test (echocardiography) showed an ischemia area in the anterior left ventricular wall, with a normal ejection fraction (60%), normal sinus rhythm and ventricular diameters. An ATC 64 channels (Sensation Cardiac) was performed, indicating a single severe obstruction in the anterior interventricular artery (AIA). There were no artifacts in the examination and was obtained good visualization of the vessel (Figure 1). The superimposition of images of the ischemic areas of two non-invasive studies allowed a safe assessment of the coronary anatomy and stenosis. The patients gave their free and informed consent and underwent myocardial revascularization without extracorporeal circulation, performing a graft of the left internal thoracic artery (LITA) for the EIA. The intraoperative and postoperative periods presented no complications. The non-invasive ischemic test demonstrated relief of ischemia and the patient became asymptomatic.     Case 2 A 62-year-old man with previous myocardial infarction and multiple risk factors (smoking, hypertension and diabetes) was admitted for evaluation of our service with stable angina and positive non-invasive ischemic test. An ATC 64 channels (Sensation Cardiac) was performed, indicating a single severe obstruction in the EIA. There were no artifacts in the examination and was obtained good visualization of the vessel. Overlapping of the ischemic areas of two non-invasive studies allowed a safe assessment of the coronary anatomy and stenosis. The patient has given informed consent and underwent myocardial revascularization without extracorporeal circulation, performing a graft of the LITA artery to EIA. The intraoperative and postoperative periods presented no complications. The non-invasive ischemic test demonstrated relief of ischemia and the patient became asymptomatic.   Comments The first ATC use reports to evaluate the CRM date from the decade of 803. Unfortunately, for many years the technique remained underused, mainly due to the resolution, capture speed and images captured with ECG (gating) inadequate. In recent years, interesting news has been notified about the method. The new ATC equipment with 64 channels are now able to provide images with resolution and capacity similar to conventional invasive coronary angiogram with high sensitivity and specificity2. Most of the studies is to evaluate the grafts, not the native coronary vessels. Because of this, there is a lack of consistent information regarding the ability of the method to correctly define the native coronary bed. A recent report demonstrated a diagnostic accuracy of 97% in detecting lesions in patients with suspected coronariana4 artery disease. Despite these good results, some technical issues remain unresolved. respiratory retention, presence of metal clips (patients re-operation) and intense calcium artifacts reduce image quality and the ability of the method to provide accurate and perfect images. The evaluation of the backflow is another matter; the evaluation of the distal anastomotic site is still a desafio5. The role and effectiveness of ATC are controversial and there is strong enough evidence to allow their widespread use and avoid the use of invasive study. A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that ATC is comparable to invasive angiogram in evaluating grafts, but was not able to demonstrate the same for the native coronary vessels and suggested new randomized clinical trials in order to get strong enough evidence to clarify this issue6. On the other hand, there is a need for a precise, fast and non-invasive to assess the coronary tree. The risk of invasive coronary angiography is low, but the complications are serious and many are potentially fatais7. Furthermore, the use of radiation is increased in ATC comparable to invasive angiogram. In patients undergoing re-operation, the use of ATC can provide useful information such as the position of the graft to a safer sternotomy, not only patency. In this scenario, the use of only ATC to perform the CRM is limited to a small number of patients with well-defined lesions, a non-intense presence of calcium and the prevention of artifacts. The absence of arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation and a low heart rate are required. The constant evolution of CT images and software that reduce artifacts with improved acquisition speed probably will in the near future, provide images comparable to the gold standard invasive angiogram. This development will represent a milestone in the evaluation and treatment of coronary artery disease (CAD), giving a better opportunity to the patient and his physician, the interventional cardiology and surgeon to choose a better approach to the DAC in each specific situation, no longer under the pressure presence of a local catheter. The advancement and development of new ATC will probably in the near future, provide adequate visualization and evaluation of native vessels and coronary grafts, allowing this is the only method required pre- and postoperatively. The possibility of avoiding the use of invasive coronary angiogram will decrease the risk to patients and provide a valuable tool for preoperative selection of the best treatments for CAD, including CRM. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   