SUMMARY The coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is a well established procedure with current precise indications. The advent and spread of this technique was possible after the introduction of the coronary angiogram. Although many evaluation methods have evolved in recent years, none could replace the invasive coronary angiogram as a pre-surgery examination. Computed tomography (CT) has emerged as an alternative to invasive coronary angiogram. This report describes two cases of CRM conducted using only CT and anatomical evaluation technique of preoperative coronary arteries. Keywords: Coronary Angiography, Myocardial Revascularization, Emission Computed Tomography.     Foundation The myocardial revascularization surgery (CRM) is a well established procedure with current precise indications. The advent and spread of this technique was possible after the introduction of the coronary angiogram by Sones 1. The technique allowed the accurate identification of coronary stenosis and thus correct placement of the graft. Although many evaluation methods have been developed in recent years, many of them non-invasive. So far, none of them could replace the invasive coronary angiogram as a preoperative examination, providing accurate information about the topography of the coronary vessels, in order to the CRM be carried out. Recently, computed tomography angiography (CTA), especially the 64-channel, emerged as an alternative to invasive coronary angiogram with high sensitivity, specificity and high predictive values compared to the standard method of ouro2. The principal focus of the method, regarding cardiac surgery, is evaluating the patency of the anastomosis. So far, there is no CRM reports carried out using only the CT as the only preoperative form of coronary angiogram. This report describes two cases of CRM conducted using only CT and anatomical evaluation of preoperative technique of coronary arteries.   Case reports Case 1 A 68-year-old man with stable angina and presenting numerous risk factors (smoking, hypertension, high serum cholesterol levels and physical inactivity) was admitted in our hospital for a routine evaluation. The non-invasive stress test (echocardiography) showed an area of ischemia in the anterior left ventricular wall, with a normal ejection fraction (60%), normal sinus rhythm and ventricular diameters. An ATC of 64 channels (Cardiac Sensation) was performed, indicating a single severe obstruction in the anterior interventricular artery (AIA). There were no artifacts in the examination and a good visualization of the vessel (Figure 1) was obtained. The superimposition of images of the ischemic areas of two non-invasive studies allowed a safe assessment of the coronary anatomy and stenosis. The patients gave their free and informed consent and underwent to a myocardial revascularization without extracorporeal circulation, performing a graft of the left internal thoracic artery (LITA) for the EIA. The intraoperative and postoperative periods presented no complications. The non-invasive ischemic test demonstrated relief of ischemia and the patient became asymptomatic.     Case 2 A 62-year-old man with previous myocardial stroke and multiple risk factors (smoking, hypertension and diabetes) was admitted for evaluation of our service with stable angina and positive non-invasive ischemic test. An ATC 64 of channels (Sensation Cardiac) was performed, indicating a single severe obstruction in the EIA. There were no artifacts in the examination and a good visualization of the vessel was obtained. Overlapping of the ischemic areas of two non-invasive studies allowed a safe assessment of the coronary anatomy and stenosis. The patient has given an informed consent and underwent myocardial revascularization without extracorporeal circulation, performing a graft of the ATIE artery to AIA. The intraoperative and postoperative periods presented no complications. The non-invasive ischemic test demonstrated relief of ischemia and the patient became asymptomatic.   Comments The first ATC's use reports for the CRM's evaluation date from the decade of 803. Unfortunately, for many years, the technique remained underused, mainly due to the resolution, capture speed and images captured with ECG (gating) as being inadequate. In recent years, interesting news have been published about the method. The new ATC equipments with 64 channels are now able to provide images with resolution and similar capacity to the conventional invasive coronary angiogram with high sensitivity and specificity2. Most of the studies have the aims to evaluate the grafts, not the native coronary vessels. Because of this, there is a lack of consistent information regarding the ability of the method to correctly define the native coronary layer. A recent report demonstrated a diagnostic accuracy of 97% in detecting injuries in patients with suspected coronary artery disease 4. Despite these good results, some technical issues remain unresolved. Respiratory retention, presence of metal clips (patients re-operation) and intense calcium artifacts reduce image quality and the ability of the method to provide accurate and perfect images. The evaluation of the back-flow is another matter; the evaluation of the distal anastomotic site is still a challenge. The role and the effectiveness of the ATC are controversial and there is strong enough evidence to allow their widespread use and avoid the use of the invasive study. A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that ATC is comparable to invasive angiogram in evaluating grafts, but it was not able to demonstrate the same for the native coronary vessels and suggested new randomized clinical trials in order to get strong evidence enough to clarify this issue6. On the other hand, there is a need for a precise, fast and non-invasive method to assess the coronary tree. The risk of invasive coronary angiography is low, but the complications are serious and many are potentially fatal 7. Furthermore, the use of radiation is increased in ATC comparable to the invasive angiogram. In patients undergoing re-operation, the use of ATC can provide useful information such as the position of the graft to a safer sternotomy, not only patency. In this scenario, the only use of ATC to perform the CRM, is limited to few patients with serious lesions, with a non-intense presence of calcium and prevention of artifacts. The absence of arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation and a low heart rate, are required. The constant evolution of CT images and software that reduce artifacts with improved acquisition speed probably will, in the near future, provide images comparable to the gold standard invasive angiogram. This development will represent a milestone in the evaluation and treatment of coronary artery disease (CAD), giving a better opportunity to the patient and his physician, the interventional cardiology and the surgeon to choose a better approach for the DAC, on each specific situation, no longer under the pressure of the presence of a local catheter. The advance and development of the recent ATC will probably provide an adequate visualization and evaluation of native vessels and coronary grafts in the near future, allowing this to be the only required method in pre and post-surgery. The possibility of avoiding the use of invasive coronary angiogram will decrease the risk to patients and provide a valuable tool for preoperative selection of the best treatments for CAD, including CRM. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare no pertinent conflict of interest. Sources of Funding This current study had no external funding sources. Academic Linkage There is no association of this study to graduate programs.   