 ABSTRACT coronary artery bypass grafting (CRM) is a procedure well established with current advice accurate. The advent and the spread of this technique was possible after the introduction of the coronary angiogram. Although many evaluation methods have evolved in recent years, none has managed to replace the coronary angiogram invasive as an examination pre-operatively. Computed tomography (CT) has emerged as an alternative to coronary angiogram-invasive. The present report describes two cases of CRM carried out using only TC as a technique for evaluating anatomic coronary arteries in the preoperative period. Key words: Coronary Angiography, Myocardial Revascularization, Computed Tomography of Issue. Foundation surgery for coronary artery bypass grafting (CRM) is a procedure well established with indications current accurate. The advent and the spread of this technique was possible after the introduction of coronary angiogram by Sones1. The technique allowed the accurate identification of stenosis of the coronary artery and thus, the correct placement of the graft. Although many evaluation methods have developed in recent years, many of them non-invasive, until now none of them has managed to replace the coronary angiogram invasive as an examination pre-operative, providing accurate information about the topography of the coronary vessels, in order to carry out the CRM. Recently, the angiography by computed tomography (ATC), especially the 64 channels, it has emerged as an alternative to coronary angiogram-invasive, with high sensitivity, specificity, and high predictive values when compared to the standard method of ouro2. The main focus of the method, in relation to cardiac surgery, is the assessment of the patency of the anastomosis. Up to now, there are no reports of CRM carried out using only the CT scan as the only pre-operative coronary angiogram. The present report describes two cases of CRM carried out using only the TC as a technical pre-operative evaluation of the anatomical coronary arteries. Case reports Case 1 A man of 68 years, with stable angina, and presenting numerous risk factors (smoking, hypertension, high levels of serum cholesterol and physical inactivity) was admitted in our service for a routine evaluation. The stress testing non-invasive (echocardiogram) showed an area of ischemia in the left ventricular wall earlier, with a normal ejection fraction (60%), ventricular diameters and normal sinus rhythm. An ATC of 64 channels (Sensation Cardiac) was performed, indicating a single obstruction severe artery anterior interventricular (AIA). There were no artifacts in the examination and has obtained good visualization of the vessel (Figure 1). The superposition of the images of the areas of ischemia of two studies non-invasive allowed for a reliable evaluation of the coronary anatomy and stenosis. The patient gave his informed consent and was submitted to coronary artery bypass surgery without extracorporeal circulation, performing a graft of the thoracic artery left internal(ATIE) for the EIA. The periods of intra-operative and post-operative period showed no complications. The test ischemic non-invasive demonstrated relief of ischemia and the patient became asymptomatic. Case 2 A man aged 62, with myocardial infarction prior and multiple risk factors (smoking, hypertension and diabetes was admitted for evaluation in our service with stable angina and test ischemic non-invasive positive. An ATC of 64 channels (Sensation Cardiac) was performed, indicating a single obstruction severe in the EIA. There were no artifacts in the examination and has obtained good visualization of the vessel. The superposition of the areas of ischemia of two studies non-invasive allowed for a reliable evaluation of the coronary anatomy and stenosis. The patient gave his informed consent and was submitted to coronary artery bypass surgery without extracorporeal circulation, performing a graft of the artery ATIE to the EIA. The periods of intra-operative and post-operative period showed no complications. The test ischemic non-invasive demonstrated relief of ischemia and the patient became asymptomatic. Comments The first reports of the use of ATC for the assessment of CRM back to the 803. Unfortunately, for many years the technique has remained underutilized, mainly due to the resolution, speed of capture, and captured images with ECG gating) to be inadequate. In recent years, interesting news have been expressed about the method. The new equipment of the ATC with 64 channels now are able to provide images with resolution and capacity similar to the angiogram, coronary artery invasive conventional, with high sensitivity and especificidade2. The majority of studies aims to evaluate the grafts and not the coronary vessels native. Because of this, there is a lack of consistent information in relation to the ability of the method to correctly set the bed, the coronary artery native. An account of recent demonstrated a diagnostic accuracy of 97% in the detection of lesions in patients with suspected arterial disease coronariana4. Despite these good results, some technical issues remain unresolved. Retention respiratory, presence of clips metal (patients re-operation), and artifacts of calcium intense reduce the quality of the image, and the method's ability to provide precise imaging and perfect. The evaluation of retrograde flow is another issue; the assessment of the site anastomótico distal is still a desafio5. The role and effectiveness of the ATC are controversial and there is no evidence strong enough to allow their widespread use and to avoid the use of the study invasive. A recent meta-analysis showed that the ATC is comparable to angiogram invasive evaluation of grafts, but was not able to demonstrate the same in relation to the coronary vessels of native and suggested new randomized clinical trials in order to obtain evidence strong enough to clarify this questão6. On the other hand, there is a need for a method accurate, fast and non-invasive to assess the tree crown. The risk of coronary angiography invasive is low, but the complications are severe and many of them are potentially fatais7. In addition, the use of radiation is increased in the ATC, which is comparable to angiogram is invasive. In patients undergoing re-operation, the use of the ATC can provide useful information such as the position of the graft to a sternotomy more secure, not just patency. In this scenario, the use of only the ATC to perform the CRM is limited to a small number of patients with lesions well-defined, a presence of non-intense calcium and the prevention of artifacts. The absence of arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation and low heart rate are mandatory. The constant evolution of the images by computer tomography and software that reduce artifacts with acquisition speed is improved will probably, in the near future, to provide images comparable to angiogram invasive gold standard. This evolution will represent a milestone in the evaluation and treatment of coronary artery disease (cad), giving a better opportunity to the patient and his doctor, interventional cardiology and surgeon choose the best approach to the DAC in each specific situation, no longer under the pressure of the presence of a catheter site. The advancement and development of the recent ATC will probably, in the near future, provide the preview, and appropriate assessment of vessels, native and grafts, coronary, allowing that this is the only required method in the periods pre-and post-operatively. The possibility of avoiding the use of coronary angiogram invasive will decrease the risks to the patient and will provide a valuable instrument for the selection of pre-operative of the best treatments for the DAC, including the CRM. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 