ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: The angiography has been used as a standard reference to define coronary artery disease (CAD), although its limitations are known. The value of the measurement of fractional flow reserve (FFR) in the evaluation of CAD is well established. The aim of this study is to evaluate the accuracy of angiography in defining ischemic lesions and its correlation with FFR. METHODS: Two hundred and fifty patients were included in the study (471 vessels). All stenosis > 50% by visual estimation of angiography (EVA) was evaluated by measuring the FFR. If the FFR < 0.75, the injury was treated, the FFR > 0.75, the injury was not treated. The injuries were divided into moderate (< 70% - 327) and severe (125) by the CSF. They determined the coefficient correlation between the degree of stenosis (% DE), the FFR and the accuracy of EVA in defining whether an injury was or not ischemic. RESULTS: It was possible to obtain the FFR in 96% of lesions. Mean% and FFR 56 ± 8% and 0,74 and 76 ± 6% and 0.48 for moderate and severe injuries respectively. It was noted a poor correlation between the% DE and FFR, specially on these stenoses (Spearman rho = - 12:33, p < 0.0001). The accuracy of EVA compared with FFR was 57% and 96% in intermediate versus severe injuries. CONCLUSION: Coronary angiography is not appropriate to assess the functional importance of coronary lesions, it is necessary to associate it with a functional method to do it, especially in moderate lesions. Keywords: coronary angioplasty, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, containers, myocardial ischemia.     Introduction It is known that the presence of myocardial ischemia verified in myocardial scintigraphy is one of the most important prognostic factors in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) 1,2. Nevertheless, many percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) are performed only based on angiography criteria, without prior assessment of the existence of ischemia 3. Moreover, despite its undoubted merits, angiography shows known limitations in estimating the true severity of coronary obstructions, particularly in the case of moderated stenoses 4,5. In turn, the value of the fractional flow reserve (FFR) in myocardial ischemia definition has been widely established 6-8. It is known that vessels that present FFR>;;0.75 can be safely treated conservatively while an FFR<;0.75 is myocardial ischemia signal and patients in these cases could be benefit from percutaneous revascularization procedures or surgery9-11. The aim of this study was to analyze, in all patients (and injuries) that underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in Interventional Cardiology Department of St. Helena Heart Hospital in a given period, the accuracy of visual estimation of angiography (EVA) and quantitative coronary angiography (QCA) in pointing what injuries are responsible for the myocardial ischemia, comparing their results with those of the FFR.   Methods: The sample of this study consisted of 250 patients referred for elective coronary angioplasty from October 2004 to April 2005. Were excluded patients with chronic vessel occlusion or an angiographically significant disease in the left main coronary artery. In all patients, the diagnostic coronary angiography was performed two days to three weeks before the interventional procedure. The study design can be seen in Fig.1. All patients selected for angioplasty had their angiograms analyzed by three independent cardiologists, who were not aware of the symptoms of patients. They classified the coronary lesions in two categories, according to the angiography visual estimate: 1) significant lesions by EVA, whose appointment was treated by angioplasty with or without stenting; 2) non-significant lesions by EVA, whose nomination was not treated. If there was no unanimity in relation to the visual impression of cardiologists, the decision to treat or not was based on a simple majority. Cardiac catheterization and intrapulmonary pressure measures Catheterization was performed via the femoral artery, using catheters 6F or 7F without lateral guide holes. Before angiography, were administered-10,000 IU of intravenous heparin and 0.5 mg of intracoronary nitroglycerin. Continuing, intracoronary pressure measurements were held in all vessels with stenosis > 50% by visual estimation, using a guide wire 0.014 "(PressureWire® 4 Sensor, RADI Medical Systems, Uppsala, Sweden) that was positioned at the distal bed of each coronary to be analyzed, one by one. Adenosine is administered intravenously through the sheath placed in the femoral vein at a dose of 140 mg/kg/min to induce maximal hyperemia. The FFR was automatically determined as the ratio between the mean distal coronary pressure and mean pressure in the aorta (measured by the guide catheter) during hyperemia máxima6. All stenosis responsible for ischemia (FFR < 0.75) were treated by percutaneous intervention when technically possible. Stenoses whose FFR was > 0.75 were not subjected to ICP. Quantitative coronary angiography (QCA) and classification of lesions Quantitative coronary angiography was performed off-line by choosing the angiographic projection in which the injury proved itself more serious, using software with automatic detection algorithm of the arterial edges (CAAS II, Pie Medical Imaging, Maastricht, The Netherlands) as described previously 13. The coronary lesions were then classified into two groups: i) moderate injuries: between 40% and 70% by the CSF; 2) Serious injury: > 70% by QCA.   Statistical analysis All variables were tested for normality by the Shapiro-Wilks test and/or Kolmogorov-Smirnov. In the descriptive analysis, numerical variables were presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) or medians and interquartiles and the categorical as numbers (n) and percentages(%). The chi-square and Fisher exact tests were used for categorical variables; the unpaired Student's t test and Mann-Whitney test were used for continuous variables. The angiographic and FFR characteristics were compared between the groups of moderate and severe injuries. The Spearman correlation coefficient (rho) between the QCA and the FFR was calculated for both groups. The sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values, and accuracy of visual estimation of angiography in defining whether an injury was responsible for ischemia were also determined, taking the FFR as the reference standard. Statistical analysis was performed with Stata SE 9.1 software (Stata Corporation, Houston, Texas). P values <0.05 were considered statistically significant, and all tests were two-tailed.   Results During a period of seven consecutive months, 284 patients were admitted in our Service to undergo coronary angioplasty with or without stenting. Of these, nine had acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and 25 showed chronic occlusion of the culprit vessel, being excluded. Therefore, 250 patients were included in the study. The clinical features of these patients can be analyzed in Table 1. Most patients (70%) had stable angina and multivessel disease (single-vessel disease: 30%; biarterial: 43%; three-vessel: 27%). After analyzing the distribution of FFR patients with significant lesions in one, two or three vessels was changed, as can be seen in Fig.2.         FFR was successfully obtained in 452 (96%) injuries analyzed. On 19 stenoses, it was not possible to measure FFR because of technical problems (extreme tortuosity, failure to cross the lesion with the guidewire or very distal lesion). Angioplasty was performed with stent implantation in 256 stenoses related to 193 patients, with 100% success in the procedure in this group of tumors. Visual estimate of angiography vs FFR There was complete agreement between reviewer cardiologists of angiographies in relation to injury treatment strategy in 65% of stenoses and 35% showed a difference between a reviewer and the other two. PCI was indicated in 350 lesions based on angiographic criteria of visual estimation of the injury. After measuring the FFR it was found that 30% of stenoses (105) were not responsible for ischemia (FFR > 0.75) and no interventional treatment was performed. However, reviewers cardiologists considered that 100 stenoses had no functional significance should be kept only under monitoring and drug treatment. The measurement of FFR showed that 40% of these injuries (41) were ischemic (FFR < 0.75) and required some sort of interventional treatment when technically possible. The capacity of the visual estimation of angiography in detecting myocardial ischemia, taking the FFR as the reference standard, resulted in high sensitivity (85.7%) but low specificity (36.7%) and positive predictive value (70%) and negative (59.8%). The accuracy of the EVA was 68% in the group of studied lesions. When we considered only moderate injuries accuracy of EVA was 57% vs 96% in serious injury. The misinterpretation of the severity of the injury was moderate lesions in both directions, ie apparently serious injuries proved innocent and benign lesions with angiographic characteristics that showed ischemic. CSF vs FFR The angiographic characteristics of the moderate and severe lesions can be seen in Table 2. There was an inverse correlation between the degree of stenosis by CSF and FFR (Picture3), which was better in serious lesions (rho = - 0.55; p < 0.0001) than in moderate ones (rho = - 0 33; p < 0.0001). In the group of moderate injuries the cutoff above which more than 90% of the lesions were ischemic was 64%; Likewise, stenosis less than 40% by CSF showed low possibility of being responsible for ischemia (< 10%). In our study, the minimum lumen diameter (MLD) pre-PCI was not a good parameter to infer ischemia. FFR higher values or lower than 0.75 occurred in all DLM tracks.     Discussion The results of this study confirm the limitations of angiography to allow precise identification of hemodynamically significant stenoses. This method was inaccurate to provide the identification of obstructions that impede coronary flow, especially in cases where the degree of reduction of light was defined as moderate, this is between 40% and 70% by CSF. Several studies have shown that treatment of patients with evidence of ischemia is beneficial and provides good results in the medium and long term; however, revascularization based on anatomical criteria is debatable and does not seem to show any advantage over a conservative treatment 1,9-11. Taking into account the consensus of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) to justify ICP, must prove the existence of isquemia14,15. As in many cases the patients are sent to ICP no objective evidence of ischemia3, and as FFR is an effective and specific index for injury to indicate whether a particular stenosis is culpada6-9, this study suggests that many patients, especially those with multivessel disease they are routed to PCI without proper selection of lesions to be treated, especially in the group of moderate injuries. It is also known that the myocardial scintigraphy and other non-invasive methods for detecting ischemia, although consecrated, have limitations. Lima et al.16 conducted a study that analyzed 143 patients with three-vessel CAD, documented by angiography to assess the association of the evaluation of ventricular function with perfusion, using computed tomography by photon emission (SPECT), increases the detection of defects in multiple vascular territories. They found that only 46% of patients with severe triple vessel disease exhibit a "standard multivessel" by SPECT. In contrast, the FFR measured in atherosclerotic vessels in both single-vessel disease and multi-vessel provides the interventional cardiologist functional and accurate spatial information with greater accuracy than 90% and can be assessed at the same time of coronary angiography saving time and costs to the patient and to the system 6- 9. The incorporation of physiological information to the diagnostic bank of the interventional cardiologist can be useful in making decisions during ICP especially in moderate stenoses, which are the most frequent on a daily basis. The FFR was validated in experimental models and in studies in humans in several clinical conditions, in recent anos8,17-19. It is a simple, reprodutível6,7, safe, and be independent of hemodynamic status and suffer little influence microcirculation. Its correlation with non-invasive methods such as scintigraphy of the myocardium, ecostress and dobutamine stress testing is very good, with moreover the advantage of being specific for every vessel and obstrução8,12. Both the visual estimation of angiography as the QCA methods are limited when it comes to assessing moderate injury. Fischer et al.4 analyzed 83 moderate injuries (between 40% and 70%) and compared visually estimated angiography and CSF FFR with the detection of ischemic lesions. Their findings suggested that both EVA as the CSFs were very effective in predicting the functional significance of most mild stenosis, especially those smaller lesions than 60%. These data were corroborated by this study whose results showed that moderate injury angiography may lead to errors, both to the cardiologist indicate the need for revascularization in cases in which there is ischemia, such as making patients with reduced myocardial perfusion stop receiving the best treatment. St. Anna et al20 using FFR with routine tool at all elective angioplasty during a certain period, showed that 32% of coronary lesions and 48% of patients have received treatment incorrect if only visual estimation of angiography was Next, emphasizing the usefulness of the measurement of FFR as an auxiliary tool in decision-making during the percutaneous coronary interventions. There are several limitations in this study: in the first place, it is generally considered that the patient is undergoing coronary arteriography and then to elective PCI after conducting a non-invasive functional test, which was not observed in most cases from our work. However, this is routine in many services in Brazil and other parts of world 3 and our study sought to reflect this actual situation of the practice of ICP in our environment. Second, the process of assessment of coronary lesions was subjective, based on individual experiences, although thus more accurately reflects what happens in the real world. Moreover, the three reviewers were cardiologists with extensive experience in the field coronary angiography. Thirdly, the FFR cutoff value for defining ischemia was 0.75, which value was validated based on various studies 6-8, which, in turn, analyze only selected populations of patients with single-vessel, non-diabetic and non-revascularized. The study population was more heterogeneous and included diabetic patients with previous myocardial stroke, some already revascularized and probably some cases of myocardial hypertrophy. It is possible that investigations directed to analyze the performance of FFR in these populations, whose characteristics are more similar to those of our work, demonstrate that FFR values related to the presence of myocardial ischemia are distinct from the one used in this work, which could modify the calculation of accuracy of angiography. However, these data are not yet available, and so we adopted the value 0.75 as the one that allowed distinguish between cases with and without myocardial ischemia.   Finally, this study showed that coronary angiography has reduced diagnostic accuracy concerning to detecting Ischemia in moderate injury, making clear the need to link it to a functional method to correctly guide the treatment of these stenoses. However, angiographically sharp injuries (the QCA) have strong association with the presence of ischemia. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Study Association This article is part of the thesis of doctoral Fernando Mendes Sant'Anna at the Heart Institute - USP.   