 SUMMARY background: angiography is being used as the reference standard for defining coronary artery disease (cad), although its limitations are known. The value of the measure of flow fractional reserve of the myocardium (FFR) in the evaluation of cad is well established. OBJECTIVE: THE aim of this study is to assess the accuracy of angiography in defining the ischemic lesions and its correlation with the FFR. METHODS: two Hundred and fifty patients were included in the study (471 vessels). All stenosis > 50% by visual estimation of angiography (EVA) were evaluated by measuring the FFR. If the FFR <0.75 the lesion was treated, if FFR >0.75 the lesion was not treated. The lesions were divided into moderate (<70% - 327) and serious (125) by the CSF. Were determined the correlation coefficient between the degree of stenosis (%), the FFR and the accuracy of the EVA in defining whether an injury was or was not ischemic. RESULTS: it Was possible to obtain the FFR in 96% of the injuries. %And FFR average of 56±8% and 0.74 and 76±6% and 0,48 for the injuries to moderate and severe respectively. We noticed a poor correlation between the %and the FFR, especially in the lesions with moderate (Spearman's rho = - 0.33, p<0.0001). The accuracy of the EVA compared with FFR was 57% and 96% in lesions of moderate versus severe. CONCLUSION: coronary angiography is not suitable to assess the functional importance of the injury to coronary heart, it being necessary to associate it to a workable method to able to do it, especially in the lesions moderate. Key words: coronary Angioplasty, angioplasty transluminal percutaneous coronary, containers, myocardial ischemia. Introduction it is Known that the presence of myocardial ischemia verified in the scintigraphy of the myocardium is one of the prognostic factors most important in patients with coronary artery disease (cad)1,2. Nevertheless, many interventions coronary percutaneous (ICP) are conducted based on the criteria angiographic, without prior evaluation of the existence of isquemia3. In addition, despite its merits, the undisputed, angiography shows known limitations in the estimation of the severity of actual obstructions in the coronary arteries, particularly in the case of stenosis moderadas4,5. In turn, the value of the flow fractional reserve of the myocardium (FFR) in the setting of myocardial ischemia has been widely estabelecido6-8. It is known that vessels that have FFR >0,75 can be handled with safety in a conservative manner while an FFR <0,75 it is a sign of myocardial ischemia and the patients, in these cases, power would benefit from revascularization procedures percutaneous or cirúrgica9-11. The aim of this study was to analyze, in all the patients (and lesions) undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (ICP) in the Service of Interventional Cardiology of the St. Helena Hospital's Heart in a given period, what is the accuracy of the visual estimation of angiography (EVA) and coronary angiography, quantitative (CSF) to point out which are the lesions responsible for myocardial ischemia, comparing their results with those of FFR. Methods The cohort of this study consisted of 250 patients referred for percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty elective in the period from October 2004 to April 2005. Were excluded patients with occlusion chronic of the vessel, or disease angiograficamente significant in the trunk of the coronary left. In all patients, the coronary angiography diagnostic had been performed two days to three weeks before the procedure interventional. The study design can be viewed in the fig. 1. All patients selected for angioplasty had their angiography reviewed by three cardiologists independent, who were not aware of the symptoms of the patients. They classified the lesions of coronary artery in two categories, according to the visual estimation of angiography: 1) significant injury by EVE, whose indication was to treat by means of angioplasty with or without stent implantation; 2) injuries to non-significant by EVE, whose appointment was not treat. In the case of absence of unanimity in relation to the visual impression of the cardiologists, the decision to treat or not based on simple majority. Cardiac catheterization and measures pressóricas intracoronarianas The catheterization was performed via the femoral artery, using a catheter guide 6F or 7F without side holes. Before the angiogram, administered-if 10,000 IU of heparin intravenously and 0.5 mg of nitroglycerin routes. The following were the measures pressóricas intracoronarianas in all vessels with stenosis >50% by visual estimation, using a rope guide 0,014" (PressureWire® 4 Sensor, RADI Medical Systems, Uppsala, Sweden) positioned on the bed distal of each coronary artery to be analyzed, one each of the vez12. Managed-if adenosine injection through the sheath placed in the vein in the femoral artery at a dose of 140 mg/kg/min to induce hyperemia maximum. The FFR was automatically determined as the ratio between the mean pressure distal in the coronary artery and the mean pressure in the aorta (measured by the guiding catheter) during hyperemia máxima6. All of the stenosis responsible for ischemia (FFR <0,75) were treated by percutaneous intervention since it is technically possible. Stenosis, whose FFR was >0.75 was were were not subjected to the ICP. Coronary angiography quantitative (CSF) and classification of the lesions At coronary angiography quantitative was performed off-line by choosing the projection angiográfica in which the injury turns out more serious, using a software algorithm of automatic detection of the lips arterial (CAAS II, Pie Medical Imaging, Maastricht, The Netherlands), as described previamente13. Lesions of the coronary artery were then classified in two groups: (I) Injury moderate: between 40% and 70% by the CSF; 2) serious Injury: >70% by QCA. Statistical analysis All variables were tested for normality by the tests of Shapiro-Wilks and/or the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. In the descriptive analysis, the numerical variables were presented as mean±standard deviation (SD) or medians and interquartile and categorical as numbers (n) and percentages (%). The Chi-square test and the Fisher exact test were used for categorical variables; Student's t-test, non-paired and the Mann-Whitney test were used for continuous variables. The characteristics angiographic and FFR were compared between the groups of lesions, moderate and severe. The Spearman correlation coefficient (rho) between CSF and the FFR was calculated for both groups. The sensitivity, specificity, predictive values, positive and negative, and the accuracy of the visual estimation of angiography in defining if a specific injury was responsible for ischemia were also determined, taking the FFR as standard of reference. The statistical analysis was performed with the program Stata SE 9.1 (Stata Corporation, Houston, Texas). P-values<0.05 were considered statistically significant, and all tests were bicaudals. Results During a period of seven consecutive months, 284 patients were admitted in our Service to undergo percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty with or without stent implantation. Of these, nine presented with acute myocardial infarction (IAM), and 25 showed occlusion chronic vessel guilty, being excluded from the study. Therefore, 250 patients were included in the study. The clinical characteristics of these patients can be reviewed in table 1. The majority of patients (70%) had stable angina and disease multiarterial (uniarteriais: 30%; biarteriais: 43%; triarteriais: 27%). After the analysis of the FFR the distribution of patients with significant injuries in a one, two or three vessels was changed, as can be observed in fig. 2. The measurement of FFR was successful in 452 (96%) lesions analyzed. On 19 strictures, it was not possible to measure the FFR because of technical issues (sizes extreme, a failure to cross the lesion with the rope-guide or injury very distal). Was performed angioplasty with stenting in 256 strictures regarding the 193 patients, with 100% of success in the procedure in this group of lesions. Visual estimation of angiography vs. FFR agreement Was found complete among the cardiologists reviewers of angiography in relation to the strategy of treatment for the injury in 65% of the stenosis and in 35% there was disagreement between a reviewer and the other two. It was indicated ICP in 350 lesions based on the criteria angiographic of visual estimation of lesion. After the measurement of FFR was found that 30% of these strictures (105) were not responsible for ischemia (FFR > 0.75) and no treatment interventionist was carried out. However, the cardiologists reviewers considered that 100 strictures did not have functional importance and should be maintained only under follow-up and drug treatment. The measurement of the FFR showed that 40% of these lesions (41) were ischaemic (FFR <0.75) and needed some kind of treatment by the interventionist when technically possible. The ability of visual estimation of angiography to detect myocardial ischemia, taking the FFR as the reference standard, resulted in high sensitivity (85,7%) but low specificity (36,7%) and predictive values positive (70%) and negative (59,8%). The accuracy of the vas was 68% in the group of lesions studied. When we considered only the lesions moderate the accuracy of the vas was 57% vs 96% in serious injuries. The error of interpretation of the severity of the injury in the lesions moderate was in both directions, that is, injury is apparently serious that if proved innocent, and lesions with characteristics angiographic benign that were ischemic. QCA vs FFR The characteristics of angiographic lesions moderate and severe can be observed in table 2. We observed an inverse correlation between the degree of stenosis by QCA and FFR (fig. 3) that was best in serious injury (rho = - 0,55; p<0.0001) than in moderate (rho = - 0,33; p<0.0001). In the group of the lesions moderate the cut-off value above which more than 90% of the lesions were ischemic was 64%; in the same way, stenosis below 40% by the CSF had a low chance of being responsible for ischemia (<10%). In our study the diameter of luminal minimum (DLM) pre-ICP was not a good parameter to infer ischemia. Values of FFR greater than or less than 0,75 occurred on all tracks of the DLM. Discussion The results of this study confirm the limitations of angiography in allowing the accurate identification of stenosis hemodynamically significant. This method proved to be inaccurate to facilitate the identification of obstructions which disturb the flow, the coronary artery, especially in cases in which the degree of reduction of the light was defined as moderate, that is, between 40% and 70% by the CSF. Several studies have shown that treatment of patients with evidence of ischemia is beneficial and provides good results in the medium and long term; however, revascularizar with on the basis of anatomical landmarks is controversial and does not seem to provide any advantage in relation to the treatment conservador1,9-11. Taking into account the consensus of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) to justify an ICP, it must prove the existence of isquemia14,15. As in many cases the patients are sent for ICP with no objective evidence of isquemia3, and how the FFR is an index of effective and specific for injury to indicate if a stenosis in particular is culpada6-9, this study suggests that many patients, especially those with multiarterial involvement, are routed to the ICP without the proper selection of lesions to be treated, especially in the group of lesions moderate. It is also known that scintigraphy of the myocardium and other methods of non-invasive detection of ischemia, although enshrined, they also present limitations. Lima and cols.16 conducted a study in which they analyzed 143 patients with cad triarterial documented by angiography, to evaluate whether the association of the evaluation of ventricular function with perfusion by means of emission computed tomography photons (SPECT) enhances the detection of defects in multiple territories vascular. They found that only 46% of patients with the disease triarterial important to exhibit a "pattern multivascular" by SPECT. In contrast, the FFR measured in the vessels in the atherosclerotic both in disease uniarterial and multiarterial provides the interventional cardiologist, functional information and spatial accurate with an accuracy greater than 90% and can be evaluated at the same time as coronary arteriography saving time and costs to the patient and to sistema6-9. The incorporation of information physiological arsenal diagnostics interventional cardiologist can be of great use in making decisions during ICP especially in the stenosis, moderate, which are the most commonly encountered in day-to-day. The FFR has been validated both in experimental models and in human studies, in different clinical conditions, and in the last anos8,17-19. It is a simple method, reprodutível6,7, safe, in addition to being independent of the hemodynamic status and suffer little influence of the microcirculation. Its correlation with the methods of non-invasive as the scintigraphy of the myocardium, the ecostress with dobutamine and the test effort is very good, featuring, in addition, the advantage of being specific to each vessel and obstrução8,12. Both the visual estimation of angiography as the CSF methods are limited when it comes to assessing injuries moderate. Fischer and cols.4 analyzed 83 injuries moderate (between 40% and 70%), and compared the visual estimation of angiography and QCA with FFR in the detection of ischemic lesions. Their findings suggested that both the EVA and the CSF were not very effective for predicting the functional significance of most of the strictures moderate, especially those with lesions smaller than 60%. These data were corroborated by the present study whose results showed that lesions of moderate to angiography may induce errors both in the direction of the cardiologist indicate the need for revascularization in cases in which there is ischemia, such as making patients with reduction of myocardial perfusion no longer receive the treatment indicated. Sant'anna and colleagues.20, using the FFR with a routine tool in all angioplastias elective during a certain period of time, showed that 32% of the lesions and coronary 48% of the patients would have received treatment incorrect if only the visual estimation of the angiogram to be followed, emphasizing the usefulness of the measurement of FFR as a tool to assist in decision-making during interventions coronary percutaneous. There are several limitations in the present study: first, in general it is considered that the patient will be subjected to coronary angiography and after the ICP elective after doing some functional test non-invasive, which did not occur in most cases of our work. However, this is the routine in many services in Brazil and in other parts of the world3, and our study sought to reflect the real situation of the practice of ICP in our midst. In the second place, the process of evaluation of lesions coronary artery was subjective, based on individual experiences, yet that this way reflects more accurately what happens in the real world. In addition, the three reviewers were cardiologists with wide experience in the field of coronary angiography. In the third place, the cut-off value of the FFR for the definition of ischemia was 0.75, a value that was validated based on several studies6-8, which, in turn, have examined only selected populations of patients uniarteriais, non-diabetic and non-under coronary bypass surgery. The population of this study was more heterogeneous and included diabetic patients with previous infarction, some already under coronary bypass surgery, and probably some cases of hypertrophy myocardial. It is possible that investigations aimed to analyze the performance of FFR in these populations, whose characteristics are more similar to those of our work, showing that the values of FFR related to the presence of myocardial ischemia are distinct from the one used in this work, which could modify the calculation of the accuracy of angiography. However, these data are not yet available, and hence we have used the value of 0.75 as the one that allowed to distinguish the cases without and with myocardial ischemia. Conclusion This study showed that coronary angiography has diagnostic accuracy is reduced for the detection of ischemia in injury to moderate, making clear the need to associate it to a method that is functional is able to correctly orient the treatment of these strictures. However, injuries angiograficamente sharp (to coronary angiography quantitative) have high association with the presence of ischemia. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Study association This article is part of the Doctoral thesis of Fernando Mendes SantAnna Heart Institute - USP. 