SUMMARY The objective of this new Brazilian consensus is to update and continue the standardization of terminology of the key terms and fundamental patterns in thorax CT scans in Portuguese. This consensus contains a summary of the main terms used in thorax CT and illustrations of classic examples. The group of authors is made up of radiologist members from the Brazilian College of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging, specializing in thoracic radiology, and pulmonologist members of the Brazilian Society of Tisiology, with particular interest in diagnostic imaging. Key words: Lung; Consensus; Tomography.     Introduction Within the evaluation of patients with thoracic diseases, the CT scan is a diagnostic instrument of great importance. In recent years, new standards and terminologies of thorax CT descriptors have been recognized in English, and some terms have become obsolete.(1-4) Despite the wide dissemination of the Brazilian consensus published in 2002 and 2005, respectively, in the magazines "Brazilian Radiology" (official organ of the Brazilian Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging College) and "Brazilian Journal of Pulmonology" (official organ of the Brazilian Society of Thoracic Association), some terms have not yet been standardized into Portuguese.(5.6) After the recent publication in 2008 of the new glossary of the Fleischner Society, (7) a group of radiologists (members of the Brazilian College of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging) specializing in thoracic radiology, together with pulmonologists (members of the Brazilian Society of Tisiology and Pulmonology) with particular interest in diagnostic imaging, developed a new version of the Brazilian consensus. The main purpose of this update is to continue the standardization of the terminology of the most important descriptors, by means of a brief and easy to read exhibition, and illustrate the main terms and standards of thorax CT with classic examples.   Glossary Air trapping Excessive gas (air) retention in all or part of the lung, especially during expiration, as a result of a partial or complete obstruction of the airways, or secondary to focal abnormalities of lung compliance. The air trapping is recognized during expiration as a reduction of the lung parenchyma attenuation, evidenced, especially, above all, by a lower density than usual (Figure 1) and lack of volume reduction.(8-10) See also attenuation pattern (perfusion) in mosaic. Atelectasis Lung volume reduction due to a smaller aeration of a part or of the entire lung.(11) Manifests itself as an increase in attenuation of lung parenchyma associated with the decrease in volume, characterized by the displacement of cracks, mediastinal structures or diaphragm and the approximation of bronchovascular structures of the involved parenchyma (Figures 2 and 3).(3,12) Distribution can be subsegmental, segmental, lobar, or involve an entire lung. It can also be classified, according to the form, as laminar (discoid) or round.(13) In studies with iodinated contrast, homogeneous enhancement of the pulmonary parenchyma can help differentiate with consolidation (Figure 3). The term "collapse" can be used in the presence of complete atelectasis of a lobe or of the entire lung.         laminar atelectasis Focal area of subsegmental atelectasis with linear or discoid configuration, extending itself to the pleura at nearly all times (Figure 4). Generally horizontal or oblique, but may also be vertically oriented. The thickness can vary from a few millimeters to over 1 cm.(14) Synonym: discoid atelectasis.     Round Atelectasis Round or oval shape atelectasis which follows adhesion of the pulmonary parenchyma adjacent to pleural thickening area, as occurring, for example, in the pleural disease related to asbestos or empyema resolution.(15) It manifests as a rounded focal opacity to which converge bronchovascular structures (comet tail sign) with pleural base near the pleura thickening area (Figure 5).(16,17) Presents homogeneous enhancement with iodinated contrast material. Parenchymal band Linear opacities, usually peripheral, most often in contact with the pleural surface that can be thickened and retracted at the contact site (Figure 6). It usually has a thickness of 1-3 mm and extends for less than 5 cm.(3) It often has horizontal distribution (perpendicular to the pleural surface), but can be oblique. Generally it translates to pleuroparenchymal fibrosis. Distortions of lung structure are usually identified. Parenchymal bands are most often found in patients exposed to asbestos.(18) Fungal ball Results from the fungal colonization of preexisting lung cavity, usually secondary to tuberculosis or sarcoidosis, but may also occur within cysts (e.g.bronchogenic cyst), blisters and dilated bronchi. Most often, the colonization is caused by Aspergillus spp., the use of the term "aspergilloma" being common in such case. It is composed of hyphae associated with mucus, fibrin and cellular debris. In CT, it presents as an image of a mass, rounded or oval, with a tendency to move to a location pending the acquisition of images in different positions (Figure 7).(19) Other common findings of fungal balls include the presence of the "rising air sign," amorphous calcification within the lesion, spongiform appearance of the lesion and adjacent pleural thickening. The term "fungus ball" should not be used as a synonym for "mycetoma" because they represent different processes.(20) See also rising air sign and Mycetoma. Bubble A hipodense focal area which has well-defined and smooth walls that do not exceed 1 mm thick (Figure 8).(4) Generally possess gaseous content, but may occasionally have liquid levels. In general, is associated with other pulmonary emphysema signs and displays paraseptal location (findings that aid in the differentiation of cysts on CT). It typically measures 1 cm or more in diameter. Bubbles smaller than 1 cm, located in the visceral pleura or in the subpleural lung region are called blebs in English.(3.7) The blebs (tentatively translated as vesicles) of apical location are often responsible for primary spontaneous pneumothorax. The term bubble in English is bulla.     See also bullous emphysema and paraseptal emphysema (distal acinar). Bronchocele Bronchial dilatation with secretion retention (mucoid impaction), usually caused by proximal occlusion, which may be congenital (e.g.: bronchial atresia) or acquired (e.g.: allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis).(21) Bronchocele appear as a tubular or branched image that resembles a gloved finger (Figure 9). On CT, one can observe, in cases of bronchial obstruction, a reduction of the attenuation of the lung parenchyma distal to the lesion.     Aerial bronchogram Radiological bronchus identification containing air, surrounded per patient lung parenchyma, where the air in the air space was replaced by a product radiologically denser than air (e.g.: transudate, exudate, blood, product buildup or neoplastic cells). In general, this expression is used when it identifies a tubular gas image (hipodense) within an opacified lung area (Figures 3 and 10). This tubular transparency should be of the size and orientation typical of a bronchus or multiple bronchi, presumably representing a segment of the bronchial tree.(22,23) Broncholith A calcified peribronchial lymph node that erodes into the adjacent bronchus, usually secondary to infections by Histoplasma sp. or Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In CT, is identified as a small focus of calcification within or adjacent to the air, most often in the middle lobe bronchus (Figure 11). Distally, can be impaction of secretions, bronchiectasis or atelectasis.(24,25) Bronchiectasis is irreversible bronchial dilation, which may be focal or diffuse. It usually results from chronic infection, obstruction of proximal airways or congenital bronchial abnormalities. Morphological HRCT findings (Figure 12) include the inner diameter of the bronchus being larger than the adjacent pulmonary artery (signet ring sign); the loss of the gradual tapering of the bronchi, defined as the maintenance of the gauge by more than 2 cm, distal to the bifurcation ("train track"); and airway identification less than 1 cm from the pleural surface. Bronchiectasis is often accompanied by bronchial wall thickening, mucoid impaction and small airway changes.(26,27) Pathology defines three types of bronchiectasis, depending on the appearance of the affected bronchus: cylindrical, varicose and vesicular (or cystic).     See also signet ring signal. Bronchiectasis and traction bronchiolectasis refer, respectively, to bronchial and bronchiolar dilatation caused by retraction of the parenchyma due to fibrosis (Figure 13).(3) They manifest themselves as bronchial and bronchiolar dilatations, generally irregular, associated with the distortion of the parenchymal by fibrosis and other pulmonary disorders (mainly reticular opacities, ground glass opacity and consolidation). They have tubular aspect, cystic or microcystic (bronchioles located on the periphery), depending on the relationship of the axis of the bronchus or bronchioles with the CT cut. The latter aspect can be confused with honeycombing, another frequent alteration associated with pulmonary fibrosis.(28) Bronchiolectasis Bronchiolar dilation. Analogous to bronchiectasis, but on a much smaller airway caliber, identified in the lung periphery (Figure 14). They manifest themselves as rounded or tubular structures, usually in the lung periphery, and with walls thickened or filled by secretions (see tree-in-bud standard).(3.7) May also be associated with other pulmonary opacities and parenchymal distortion in fibrosis situations.     See also bronchiectasis and traction bronchiolectasis. Cavity (excavation) Represents space containing gas, with or without a liquid level, within a nodule, mass or pulmonary consolidation. It usually occurs by the elimination or drainage of necrotic part by the airway (Figure 15) or for the pleural space. The walls usually have irregular contours and are more than 1 mm thick. "Cavity" is not synonymous with "abscess". The term "cavitation" should not be used as a synonym for "excavation": in Portuguese, "cavitation" has a different meaning, and its use is incorrect.(7) Cyst: Cyst is any space rounded, well-circumscribed, which is surrounded by an epithelialized or fibrous wall of variable thickness.(29) In CT, it is characterized by a rounded area of low attenuation coefficient within the lung parenchyma with a well-defined interface with adjacent normal lung (Figure 16).(1.7) The cyst wall thickness can vary and is normally thin (< 2 mm). Cysts usually contain air, but occasionally may contain liquid (e.g.bronchogenic cyst) or any solid material. Diseases that usually occur with multiple pulmonary cysts include lymphangioleiomyomatosis, histiocytosis of Langerhans cells, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia and Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome.(30,31) Collapse Generally used as a synonym for total atelectasis of one lobe or of entire lung (Figure 2).(7) See also atelectasis. Consolidation Represents padding, with replacement of the air, of the alveolar spaces by a pathological product of some type, such as, for example, inflammatory exudate (pneumonia), transudate (edema), blood (alveolar hemorrhage), lipoprotein (alveolar proteinosis), fat (lipoidic pneumonia), cells (bronchoalveolar carcinoma, lymphoma, organizing pneumonia) or gastric contents (aspiration pneumonia).(32) In CT, it manifests itself as an increase in the attenuation of the lung parenchyma which prevents visualization of vessels and outer contours of the bronchial walls. Air bronchograms can be found (Figures 3 and 10). The attenuation value of the consolidated parenchyma, to the CT scan without contrast, is rarely useful in the differential diagnosis, except in some situations (e.g.: low attenuation in lipoid pneumonia and high attenuation in amiodarone toxicity).(33,34) Architecture distortion Path dislocations and/or distortion of the morphology of anatomical structures such as bronchi, vessels, fissures or interlobular septa, usually related to diffuse parenchymal disease, particularly fibrotic.(7) In HRCT, loss of definition of the secondary lobe and reducing local volume are considered signs of distortion of lobular architecture and can be considered indirect signs of fibrosis (Figure 13).(3) Pulmonary Emphysema: Permanent increase of distal airspace to the terminal bronchioles, with destruction of alveolar walls.(35) The additional histological criteria of absence of "obvious fibrosis" has been questioned because some degree of interstitial fibrosis may be present as a result of smoking.(36) Emphysema is classified according to the acinar region affected: proximal (centriloacinar or centrilobular emphysema), distal (paraseptal emphysema), or any acini (panacinar or panlobular emphysema).(37) The tomographic findings are areas of low attenuation, typically without visible walls.(37,38) Bullous emphysema Parenchymal destruction associated with centrilobular emphysema, distal acinar (paraseptal) or panacinar (Figure 17). It is called giant bullous emphysema when the bubbles, which can vary from 1 to over 20 cm in diameter, occupy at least one-third of the hemithorax.(7.39) See also bubble. Centrilobular emphysema Destruction of the walls of the centroacinar alveoli, associated with increased respiratory bronchioles and alveoli that originate in these bronchioles. It is the most common form of emphysema in cigarette smokers. CT findings are of centrilobular areas of decreased attenuation, usually without visible walls, with non-uniform distribution, predominantly located in the upper lung regions (Figure 18).(37,38) The centrifugal arteries can often be identified within the hypodense areas. The term centrilobular is commonly used as a synonym on CT.     Interstitial Emphysema Pulmonary interstitial dissection by air, typically located in bronchovascular sheaths, in interlobular septa and in visceral pleura, more often identified in neonates undergoing mechanical ventilation (Figure 19). Interstitial Emphysema is hardly recognized radiographically in adults and is rarely seen on CT scans. The process is expressed as areas of air density with perivascular, peribronchovascular distribution and/or along the interlobular septa (Figure 20), or as rounded areas of low attenuation simulating small bubbles or cysts (Figures 19 and 20).(40.41) Panacinar emphysema Panacinar (panlobular) emphysema involving all portions of the acini and, more or less evenly, the secondary lung lobe. It predominates in the lower lobes and is a form of emphysema associated with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. Panacinar emphysema manifests on CT as a generalized decrease in lung attenuation, reducing the diameter of the blood vessels in the affected areas, with or without their distortion (Figure 21).(37,38,42) Accentuated panacinar emphysema can coexist and combine with severe centrilobular emphysema. CT may be indistinguishable from severe constrictive bronchiolitis findings.     Paraseptal emphysema (distal acinar) Emphysema which predominantly involves the distal alveoli, its ducts and alveolar sacs. Characteristically, it is delimited by any pleural surface or interlobular septa. CT is characterized by areas of low attenuation in the subpleural and peribronchovascular regions, separated by intact interlobular septum (Figure 22).(37,38) Sometimes it is associated with bubbles.     Airspaces They correspond to the space contained by the alveolar walls, including bags and alveolar ducts and alveoli in the walls of the respiratory bronchioles.(43) The term can be used in combination with consolidation, opacity or nodules to characterize the origin of these lesions in this anatomical pulmonary region, by filling these spaces with fluid or cells. The aerial bronchogram sign (Figures 3 and 10) is the trademark of airspace filling. See also aerial bronchogram. Interlobular septal thickening The thickening of connective tissue septa which separate the secondary pulmonary lobes. Featured in radiography of thin linear opacities, also called B Kerley lines. Usually it is in close contact with the side pleural surface, next to costophrenic breasts, with a right angle to the wall. Currently the terms "septal lines" or "septal thickening" have been preferred instead of Kerley lines. HRCT (Figure 23), the thickening of the interlobular septa is characterized by the presence of linear opacities delimiting the secondary pulmonary lobes, more easily characterizable in the subpleural region, which has the appearance of lines perpendicular to the pleural surface.(3.44) In the central regions of the lung, the thickening of the septa of adjacent lobes results in the appearance of polygonal arches. Septal thickening can be secondary to alteration of any of its components (veins, lymphatic vessels or connective tissue) and is a common finding in several pulmonary disorders, although their presence is particularly highlighted in cases of pulmonary edema and lymphangitis carcinomatosis. Septal thickening can be of the smooth type (Figure 23), nodular (Figure 24) or irregular. This differentiation can help in the differential diagnosis of various etiologies.         Centrilobular structures Central region of the secondary pulmonary lobule, represented by pulmonary-artery bronchioles set and the surrounding lung tissue.(45) On the HRCT of normal patients, it corresponds to a small linear or nodular image, located 3-10 mm from the pleural surface or of interlobular septum, which is the interlobular pulmonary artery, approximately 1 mm in diameter (Figure 25).(46.47) The corresponding bronchiole, when normal, has walls with the thickness of approximately 0.15 mm, inferior to the HRCT resolution limit. Therefore, the bronchiolar disease that produces accentuation of centrilobular structure occurs when there is thickening of the wall or filling of the bronchiolar light (Figure 26). Centrilobular patterns include: (a) nodes; (B) tree-in-bud; (C) thickening of the peripheral peribronchovascular interstice; and (d) areas with reduced attenuation without visible walls (emphysema).         Honeycombing (honeycomb) Pulmonary cysts created by the destruction of distal airspaces, by lung parenchyma fibrosis, with remodeling of the architecture of acinar and bronchioles. The honeycombing cysts are lined by bronchiolar metaplastic epithelium and represent the final stage of various lung diseases.(1.48) On HRCT, it is characterized by multiple cysts, generally of subpleural location, with similar diameters (typically 0.3-1 cm) grouped in layers and sharing well-defined walls with 1-3 mm of density (Figure 27).(49) Represents a tomographic marker of pulmonary fibrosis. The main causes include idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, collagen diseases, chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, pulmonary drug reactions and asbestosis.(28) It should be distinguished from paraseptal emphysema and traction bronchiolectasis.     Progressive massive fibrosis Confluence of small pulmonary nodules, generally accompanied by fibrosis (Figure 28). They are often bilateral and predominate in the upper lobes. May be accompanied by an irregular increase in air space on their periphery. Usually found in patients with a history of exposure to inorganic dust (e.g.: pneumoconiosis of coal miners and silicosis).(50) Similar tomographic findings can be found in sarcoidosis and talcosis.(51) Fissure (crack) Invagination of the visceral pleura that covers the outer surface into the lung parenchyma.(7) Each interlobar fissure is formed by the juxtaposition of two layers of visceral pleura. In general, we can identify larger cracks (oblique), separating the lower lobes of the others, and the lower (horizontal) fissure, which separates the middle lobe from the right upper lobe (Figure 29). Some supernumerary fissures can be found frequently.     Interface Surface of separation between two structures or spaces. When two thoracic structures with different radiological densities meet, their limits are clear. For example, vessels with soft parts in contact with the air density of the surrounding ventilated lung. The "interface sign" defines the irregularity of the margins between different intrathoracic structures, such as vessels, bronchi and pleural surfaces, generally due to the interstitial disease that causes fibrosis (Figure 30).(3) Interstice Connective tissue network that spreads through the lungs and is subdivided into: (a) axial (or Bronchovascular) interstice - involves the bronchi, arteries and veins from the threads ends to the level of the respiratory bronchioles; (B) peripheral interstice - composed of contiguous tissue to pleural surfaces (subpleural) and interlobular septa; and (c) interlobular interstice (also called acinar or parenchymal) - made up of the walls of the alveoli (alveolar septa), supporting the secondary pulmonary lobule structure.(2,3,7) Lymphonodomegaly Increase in lymph node volume of any etiology, when its dimensions exceed the limits considered normal for the lymph node chain in question (Figure 31).(52,53) The term "adenomegaly" is not a synonym, since lymph nodes are not true glandular structures. The term "lymphadenopathy" is reserved for situations where it is possible to identify the lymph node disease, for example, when necrosis is identified in its interior.     Curvilinear subpleural line Curvilinear 1-3 mm thick opacity, of subpleural location, with its distribution parallel to its surface (Figure 32). It is a nonspecific indicator for atelectasis, edema, fibrosis or inflammation.(3.7) Intralobular lines Characterized on HRCT as thin linear images within the secondary pulmonary lobule and, when highlighted, result in a smooth tracery aspect (Figure 33). This finding can be found in various situations, highlighting the fibrotic diseases (e.g.: Usual interstitial pneumonia) and those associated with standard paving pattern (e.g.: Alveolar proteinosis).(3.54) See also reticular pattern and mosaic attenuation pattern. Secondary pulmonary lobule The smallest pulmonary anatomical unit bounded by connective tissue septa. Displays polyhedral aspect, measuring 1.0-2.5 cm in diameter and contains a variable number of acini.(45) The lobe center is formed by the pulmonary artery bronchioles-set, lymphatics and interstitial adjacent. In its periphery, the connective tissue creates thin septa called interlobular septa, where small pulmonary veins and lymphatic vessels are found (Figure 25). The interlobular septa in normal patients are identified, in the best form, in the previous peripheral, lateral and juxtamediastinal of the upper and middle lobes, as well as on the periphery of the anterior diaphragmatic region of the lower lobes, tending to present itself in an incomplete or absent form in the other regions of the lung. They are easily recognizable in HRCT whenever the septal interstice is compromised (Figures 23 and 24).(3) Mass Any expansive pulmonary lesion, pleural, mediastinal or of the thoracic wall, with soft tissue density, of fat or bone, greater than 3 cm, with at least partially defined contours, out of fissures topography, regardless of the characteristics of their contours or of the heterogeneity of its content (Figure 34).(7) Mycetoma Characteristically represents a group of chronic infections caused by subcutaneous traumatic inoculation on the skin of material contaminated with actinomycetes, especially Nocardia brasiliensis, or eumycetes, resulting in actinomycetoma and eumycetoma, respectively.(20) Tends to invade adjacent tissue, forming nodules or masses with cavities and fistulae, with elimination of purulent discharge containing grains constituted by masses of hyphae and filaments. In most cases, it is located in the lower limbs and can lead to deformities and fractures. Pulmonary and pleural involvement is rare.(55) When the lung is invaded, it has the aspect of consolidation with necrosis, and pleural effusion can be identified.(56) It generally affects farmers, being endemic in Latin America, India and Africa.(20,57) Mycetoma is not a preexisting lung cavity colonization; therefore the use of this term as a synonym for "fungus ball" should be avoided. See also Fungal ball. Nodule Rounded focal opacity, or at least partially enclosed, with less than 3.0 cm in diameter, usually with soft tissue density or calcium (Figure 35). When with less than 10 mm, it is suggested to qualify it as "small lump". If it has less than 3mm, the term "micro nodule" may be employed.(3.7) It should be described according to the characteristics of its borders (ill-defined or well-defined), as well as the location and distribution (random, perilymphatic, centrilobular or pleural). As mitigation, the lump can be classified as solid (Figure 35a), when it completely obscures the parenchyma; not solid (ground-glass attenuation) when it does not obscure the vascular margins and bronchial wall (Figure 35b); or partially solid or semi-solid (ground-glass opacity with solid areas) when it partially obscures the vascular margins and bronchial walls (Figure 35c).(7) See also Mass. Oligemia focal reduction, regional or widespread pulmonary blood volume. The oligemia presents itself as a reduction in the size and number of pulmonary vessels in specific regions or diffuse, indicating that blood flow is smaller than usual (Figure 36).(3.7) Opacity Image that distinguishes itself, at least partially, from the structures that surround or overlap it, due to its higher density. On chest X-ray the term does not imply the nature of the pathological point of view, its size or specific location and can be of pulmonary origin, pleural, chest wall or external source to the patient. In CT, pulmonary opacities can represent opacity or matte glass consolidation. See also Consolidation. Opacity (attenuation) frosted glass on CT scans corresponds to the increased density of the lung parenchyma in which the contours of vessels and bronchi within the area are affected by a pathological process (Figure 37). This image pattern is related to thickening of the interstitium, partial filling of airspaces, partial collapse of alveoli, increased capillary blood volume or a combination of these mechanisms.(58.59) It should be distinguished from "consolidation" (Figures 10 and 38), in which the vessels are not identifiable within the compromised lung area.         See also Consolidation. Linear opacity Thin, elongated linear image, with fabric soft tissue density. The presence of calcification or foreign material rarely can increase the attenuation. It is a nonspecific term and of various etiologies. It is recommended whenever possible, to use more specific terminologies, such as "laminar atelectasis", "parenchymal band" and "interlobular septal thickening." Pending opacity Subpleural opacity in pending lung regions, which correspond to areas of atelectasis resulting from decubitus. It occurs in the posterior regions when the patient is in the supine position (Figure 39a) and the anterior regions when prone. Disappears with the change of decubitus (Figure 39b).(4) Parenchymal opacity (parenchymal opacification) Increased attenuation of the lung parenchyma that can potentially obscure the contours of vessels and bronchi. The term "consolidation" indicates that the edges of these structures are not apparent (except for aerial bronchograms), and "ground-glass attenuation" indicates that, despite the altered density of the lungs, blood vessels and airways are still identifiable.(4.32) One should give preference to the more specific terms "consolidation" and "ground-glass opacity" (Figure 38). Standard tree-in-bud opacities Branched centrilobular opacities, with little bumps at the ends, resembling the appearance of the budding of some trees (Figure 26).(3.45) They represent, in most cases, dilated bronchioles filled with pathological material, although it may also be associated with the infiltration of the connective peribronchovascular centrilobular tissue or occasionally with the expansion or filling (e.g.: intravascular metastases) of the centrilobular pulmonary arteries.(60,61) It means, in general, airway disease and is particularly common in infectious processes (e.g.tuberculosis, bronchopneumonia and infectious bronchiolitis) but can also be found in a range of other diseases (e.g.bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis and panbronchiolitis).(47) Mosaic attenuation pattern (perfusion) Appearance in regions with different mitigations that can represent parenchymal infiltrative disease, obliterative disease of the small airways or occlusive vascular disease (Figure 40).(62.63) Air trapping is secondary to bronchial or bronchiolar obstruction and can produce parenchymal foci of reduced attenuation, which are accentuated in the CT images obtained during the expiratory phase.(8) In obliterative disease of the small airways and occlusive vascular disease, areas with lower attenuation are abnormal and usually contain pulmonary vessels in number and smaller size than normal adjacent lung, which might have normal or increased attenuation (because the blood flow redirection). The pattern of mosaic attenuation can also be produced by parenchymal lung disease, characterized by a ground-glass opacity and, in this condition, the areas of higher attenuation represent the affected areas, and the other areas characterize preserved lung foci.(3.7) See also Air trapping. Paving mosaic pattern Superimposition of ground-glass opacities, interlobular lines and thickening of interlobular septa (Figure 41). The interface between normal lung and affected tends to be well-defined in this pattern of lung injury. This pattern was first identified in patients with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis but is also found in other diffuse lung diseases in which interstitial and alveolar compartments are affected (eg.: pulmonary hemorrhage). The English term is "crazy paving".(1,2,64) Nodular centrilobular pattern It is a distribution pattern of small nodules that occupy the central portion of the secondary pulmonary lobule, generally related to bronchiolar diseases, pulmonary artery or to the peribronchovascular conjunctival sheath.(7) The tomographic main characteristic is that they retain a few millimeters of separation from the pleural surface and fissures (Figure 42A).(45-47) The most common causes are the diseases that occur through inhalation (e.g.: pneumonitis by hypersensitivity, silicosis and respiratory bronchiolitis). If accompanied by the tree-in-bud pattern (Figure 26), infectious causes should be considered (e.g.: Tuberculosis and pneumonia). Perilymphatic nodular pattern It is a distribution pattern of small nodules along the pulmonary lymphatic system (interlobular septa, peribronchovascular conjunctiva sheath and pleural surface) (Figure 42b). The main diseases accompanied by perilymphatic nodules are sarcoidosis and carcinomatous lymphangitis.(45.65) Miliary nodular pattern - View random nodular Standard (miliary). Random nodular pattern (miliary) distribution of small nodules randomly by the lungs pattern (Figure 42c). The most common causes are miliary tuberculosis, miliary histoplasmosis and hematogenous metastases.(3,45,65) Perilobular pattern This pattern is characterized by the distribution of the abnormality along the structures that delimit the lung lobes, it means interlobular septa, the visceral pleura and large pulmonary vessels.(66) The term is more often used in the context of diseases (eg.:pneumonia in perilobular organization) which are mainly distributed around the periphery of the secondary lobe. In CT, it is characterized by the presence of thick and irregular polygonal opacities on the periphery of secondary pulmonary lobule (Figure 43).(67) It should be distinguished from interlobular septal thickening (septal default), being thicker and irregular; and the reversed halo sign.     See also septal and Standard Signal reversed halo. Reticular pattern Alteration, usually related to interstitial diseases, characterized in X-rays by numerous small linear opacities which result in a network appearance.(1) In HRCT it's possible to individualize the components responsible for this pattern on the radiography, which are usually related to the presence of interlobular and septa lines (Figure 44) or the presence of cysts whose walls appear as lines on the radiography, as in diseases cystic lung in emphysema associated with bubbles and even in honeycombing cysts.(1,3,7) See also intralobular lines. Pleural plaque, focal pleural thickening, sometimes with calcifications, variable thickness and length up to 5 cm (Figure 45).(68) Usually occurs in the subcostal parietal pleural surface or in the diaphragmatic pleura. When multiple and bilateral, it is almost always caused by exposure to asbestos.(69,70) Pneumatocele A gaseous space whose wall is formed by distended airspaces. Often changes size in short time, due to the obstructive valvular mechanism of air, which is characteristic of him.(71) It is often associated with some infectious diseases, particularly those caused by Staphylococcus sp. in children and Pneumocystis sp. in adults. In CT, manifests as rounded airspace bounded by thin walls, within the lung (Figure 46a).(3.7) May resolve spontaneously, although late, in the course of treatment of the infection (Figure 46b). Pseudocavity Represents a rounded or oval area of low attenuation coefficient in pulmonary nodules or masses or in an area of secondary consolidation: 1) presence of a portion of preserved lung parenchyma; 2) presence of dilated bronchi or even normal diameter; or 3) An emphysema area within the lesion (Figure 47). These pseudocavidades typically measure less than 1 cm in diameter. They can be identified in patients with carcinoma, bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and pneumonia.(7.72) Pseudoplaque Peripheral pulmonary opacity adjacent to the visceral pleura, formed by coalescing small pulmonary nodules simulating pleural plaque (Figure 48).(73) Most commonly found in sarcoidosis, silicosis and pneumoconiosis of coal miners. Signet ring sign, sign composed of an annular opacity, representing a dilated bronchi, associated with a lower rounded opacity, next to its wall, representing its artery (pulmonary or rarely bronchial) that gives us the appearance of a "signet ring "or" pearl ring. "(74) Corresponds to the basic tomographic sign of bronchiectasis (Figure 12).(26.75) Occasionally, the signet ring sign can also be found in diseases characterized by abnormal reduction of pulmonary blood flow, such as in chronic pulmonary thromboembolism and proximal interruption of the pulmonary artery.(76) See also Bronchiectasis. Air crescent sign Varying size air collection and shaped like a crescent or half-moon located on the outskirts of a lump or mass with soft tissue density, with characteristic, in the appropriate clinical context of angioinvasive aspergillosis in phase recovery (Figure 49).(77-79) In this case, the air crescent sign is due to the retraction of the infarcted lung and of the necrotic tissue resorption around the lesion, with the space between the devitalized tissue and the adjacent parenchyma by air.(78) It is also often to use it in the description of the fungus ball findings, where there is a collection of air surrounding the intracavitary injury or interposed between the upper wall of the cavity existing and pending intracavitary lesion (Figure 7).(7) The air crescent sign has also been described in other diseases, such as intracavitary hemorrhage, bacterial abscess and lung cancer.(80,81) See also Fungal ball. Halo sign Ground-glass opacity surrounding a nodule, mass or rounded area of consolidation (Figure 50). It was initially described as a sign of bleeding around a angioinvasive aspergillosis focus, (82) being very specific in febrile neutropenic patient, appearing early.(82) The halo signal may be caused by hemorrhaging associated with other disease (eg. candidiasis, Kaposi's sarcoma) or lung infiltration by neoplasms site.(83-86) reversed halo sign focal ground-glass opacity surrounded by a complete or partial consolidation ring (Figure 51). Initially described as a sign of developing pneumonia, however, is has already been associated with other diseases such as paracoccidioidomycosis.(87,88) Nodular septum signal (in ROSARY BEADS); irregular and nodular thickening of the interlobular septa, looking like a string of beads (Figure 24).(7) Although initially described as a sign of carcinomatous lymphangitis it is more frequently found in sarcoidosis.(89) Special Thanks Dedication to Dr. Jorge Issamu Kavakama, brilliant radiologist who has influenced generations with his talent, charisma and enthusiasm and was an active participant in the development and dissemination of other versions of the Brazilian consensus on the terminology of thorax CT descriptors.   