 ABSTRACT THE aim of this new brazilian consensus is to upgrade and give continuity to the standardization of terminology of the main descriptors and fundamental patterns of CT of the chest in the Portuguese language. This consensus contains a brief description of the principal terms used in the CT scan of the chest and illustrations of classic examples. The group of authors is formed by radiologists that are members of the Brazilian College of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging, specialized in radiology, the chest, and by chest physicians members of the Brazilian Society of Pulmonology and Tuberculosis, with a particular interest in diagnostic imaging. Descriptors: Lung; Consensus; Tomography. Introduction In the evaluation of patients with thoracic disease, CT scan is a diagnostic instrument of great importance. In recent years, new standards and terminology of the descriptors of CT of the thorax have been recognized in the English language, and some terms have become obsolete. (1-4) Despite the wide dissemination of the consensus brazilians published in 2002 and 2005, respectively, in the journals "Radiology Brasileira" (the official organ of the Brazilian College of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging) and "Brazilian Journal of Pulmonology" (the official organ of the Brazilian Society of Pneumology and Tisiology), some terms have not yet been standardized for the Portuguese language. (5,6) After the recent publication, in 2008, a new glossary of the Society Fleischner,(7) a group of radiologists (members of the Brazilian College of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging) specialist in radiology of the chest, in conjunction with pulmonologists (members of the Brazilian Society of Pneumology and Tisiology) with particular interest in diagnostic imaging, developed a new version of the brazilian consensus. The main goal of this update is to give continuity to the standardization of the terminology of the descriptors, the most important, by means of an exhibition brief and easy to read, and illustrate the main terms and standards of the CT of the chest with the classic examples. Glossary Trapping air Retention of excess gas (air) in whole or in part of the lung, especially during expiration, as a result of a partial obstruction or complete airway, or secondary to an abnormality focal length of the complacency of the lung. The trapped air is recognized on the expiratory phase as a reduction of the attenuation of the lung parenchyma, as evidenced, particularly, by a lower density than usual (Figure 1) and the absence of volume reduction. (8-10) See also the Default attenuation (perfusion) in the mosaic. Atelectasis Reducing the volume of the lung due to a lower aeration of a portion or the entire lung. (11) Manifests itself as increased attenuation of the lung parenchyma associated with the reduction in volume, characterized by the displacement of the fissures, of the structures mediastinais or of the diaphragm, and by the approximation of the structures broncovasculares of the parenchyma involved (Figures 2 and 3). (3,12) The distribution can be subsegmental, segmental, lobar, or involve an entire lung. You can also be qualified, according to the form, such as laminar (discoide) or round. (13) In studies with iodinated contrast, the enhancement homogeneous lung parenchyma can help in the differentiation with consolidation (Figure 3). The term "collapse" can be used in the presence of atelectasis a whole lobe or the entire lung. Atelectasis laminar focal Area of subsegmental atelectasis with a linear configuration or discoide, almost always extending to the pleura (Figure 4). Usually horizontal or oblique, but may also be oriented vertically. The thickness can vary from a few millimeters to over 1 cm. (14) Synonym: atelectasis discoide. Atelectasis round Atelectasis round or oval stems of adhesion of the lung parenchyma adjacent to the area of pleural thickening, as occurs, for example, in the pleural disease related to asbestos or in the resolution of the empyema. (15) Manifests itself as an opacity focal rounded to the which converge structures broncovasculares (sign of the tail of the comet) on the basis of pleural fluid along the area of thickening of the pleura (Figure 5). (16,17) Features highlight homogeneous contrast iodinated intravenous. Band parenchymal Opacity linear, usually peripheral, in the majority of the time in contact with the surface of the pleural, which may be thickened and retracted at the site of contact (Figure 6). Usually has a thickness of 1-3 mm and extends less than 5 cm. (3) is known to have distribution in the horizontal (perpendicular to the surface pleura), but can be oblique. Usually translates fibrosis pleuroparenquimatosa. Distortions of the architecture of the lung tend to be identified. Bands parenchymatous, are most frequently found in patients exposed to asbestos. (18) fungal Ball is the Result of colonization, fungal cavities pulmonary, pre-existing, usually secondary to tuberculosis or sarcoidosis, but can also occur within the cysts (for ex. : cyst broncogênico), bubbles and the bronchi dilated. Most of the time, the colonization is caused by Aspergillus spp., being common, in this case, the use of the term "aspergiloma". Represents a enovelado of hyphae associated with mucus, fibrin and cellular debris. On CT, it presents as an image of a mass, rounded or oval, with a tendency to move to a location drop-down with the acquisition of images in decúbitos different (Figure 7). (19) Other findings that are common to the fungal ball, which include the presence of the "sign of the growing air, calcification amorphous in the interior of the lesion, the aspect spongiform lesion and pleural thickening adjacent to it. The term "fungal ball" should not be used as a synonym of "micetoma", because they represent different processes. (20) See also Sign of the growing air and Micetoma. Bubble focal Area hipodensa feature walls, well-defined and smooth-not exceeding 1 mm thickness (Figure 8). (4) Generally content gas, but may occasionally have liquid level. In general, it is associated with other signs of pulmonary emphysema, and displays location parasseptal (findings that aid in differentiation of cysts in the CT scan). Typically measuring 1 cm or more in diameter. Bubbles smaller than 1 cm, located in the visceral pleura or in the region of pulmonary subpleural, are called blebs in the English language. (3,7) The blebs (tentatively translated as vesicles) location apical are often responsible for spontaneous pneumothorax primary. The English term for blister is bulla. See also Emphysema bullous and Emphysema parasseptal (acinar distal). Broncocele Dilation of bronchial with retention of secretions (impaction mucoide), usually caused by obstruction proximal, which can be congenital (by ex. : atresia, bronchial) or acquired (ex. : aspergillosis broncopulmonar allergic). (21) The broncocele presents itself as an image tube or the branch that resembles a finger of the glove (Figure 9). In the TC, it can be observed in cases of atresia, bronchial asthma, a reduction in the attenuation of the parenchyma distal to the lesion. Broncograma air Translation radiological identification of brônquio(s) containing air, surrounded by lung parenchyma the patient, where the air of the air spaces is replaced by a product pathological any, radiological denser than air (by ex. : transudato, exudate, blood, product of the accumulation cells or neoplastic). In general, it is the expression used when identifying an image of the tubular gas (hipodensa), in the interior of an area of lung opacificado (Figures 3 and 10). This is the image that the tube should have the size and orientation of the usual a brônquio or multiple bronchi, presumably representing a segment of the bronchial tree. (22,23) Broncolito lymph node peribrônquico calcified that erode to the inside of the brônquio adjacent, usually secondary to infections by Histoplasma sp. or Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In the TC, is identified as a small focus of calcification within or adjacent to the air more often in the brônquio of the middle lobe (Figure 11). Distally, there can be impaction of secretions, bronchiectasis, or atelectasis. (24,25) Bronchiectasis Dilation of bronchial irreversible, which can be focal or diffuse. Often results from chronic infection, airway obstruction proximal or abnormalities in the bronchial congenital. The findings of morphology on HRCT (Figure 12) include the internal diameter of the brônquio larger than that of the pulmonary artery adjacent (sign of the signet ring); the loss of the tapering gradual brônquio, defined as the maintenance of the gauge by more than 2 cm distal to the bifurcation (appearance in "train track"); and the identification of air less than 1 cm from the surface of pleural. Bronchiectasis are often accompanied by thickening of the bronchial walls, impaction mucoide and changes of the small airways. (26,27) The pathology defines three types of bronchiectasis, depend on the appearance of the brônquio affected: cylindrical, varicose, and saccular (or cystic). See also Sign of the signet ring. Bronchiectasis and bronquiolectasia draw Refer, respectively, to the dilation of the bronchial and bronquiolar, caused by the retraction of the parenchyma due to fibrosis (Figure 13). (3) Manifest themselves as dilations of the bronchial and bronquiolares, generally irregular, associated to the distortion of the parenchyma by fibrosis, and other pulmonary changes (primarily opacities reticular opacity in frosted glass and consolidation). Have a look tubular, cystic or microcystic (bronchioles located in the periphery), depending on the relationship of the axis of the brônquio or bronquíolo with the cutting of the TC. This last aspect can be confused with faveolamento, another frequent change associated with pulmonary fibrosis. (28) Bronquiolectasia Expansion bronquiolar. Analogous to bronchiectasis, but with an air of much smaller caliber, identified in the periphery of the lung (Figure 14). Manifest as structures with rounded or tubular, usually on the periphery of the lung, and with the walls thickened, or filled with secretion (see tree Pattern in budding). (3,7) can Also join other opacities of the lungs and to the distortion of the parenchyma in situations of fibrosis. See also Bronchiectasis and bronquiolectasia traction. Cavity (excavation) Represents a space containing gas, with or without liquid level, within a nodule, mass or consolidation in lung. Generally occurs by elimination or by the drainage of part necrotic by the air (Figure 15) or to the pleural space. The walls tend to have irregular contours and measure more than 1 mm thick. "Cavity" is not synonymous with "abscess". The term "cavitation" should not be used as a synonym for "excavation": in the Portuguese language, "cavitation" has a different meaning, and your usage is incorrect. (7) Cyst-a Cyst is any space rounded, well-circumscribed, that is surrounded by a wall epitelizada or fibrous, and of variable thickness. (29) In TC, is characterized by an area, rounded, low attenuation coefficient in the lung parenchyma with a well defined interface with the lung normal adjacent (Figure 16). (1,7) the thickness of The wall of the cyst can vary, but is usually thin (< 2 mm). Cysts usually contain air, but may occasionally contain the liquid (by ex. : cyst broncogênico) or even some solid material. Diseases that evolve, usually with multiple cysts of the lungs include the linfangioliomiomatose, langerhans cell Histiocytosis, interstitial lymphocytic pneumonia, and the syndrome of Birt-Hogg-Dubé. (30,31) Collapse Usually used as a synonym of atelectasis a whole lobe or the entire lung (Figure 2). (7) See also Atelectasis. Consolidation Represents the fill, with replacement of the air spaces (alveolar for a product by pathological any, such as, for example, exudates inflammatory (pneumonia), transudato (edema), blood (hemorrhage alveolar), lipoprotein (proteinose alveolar), fat (pneumonia lipoídica), cells (carcinoma bronquioloalveolar, lymphoma, pneumonia in the organization) or stomach contents (aspiration pneumonia). (32) In the TC, it manifests itself as increased attenuation of the lung parenchyma, which prevents the visualization of the vessels and of the outer contours of the bronchial walls. Broncogramas air can be found (Figures 3 and 10). The value of attenuation of the parenchyma consolidated, to the CT without contrast, it is rarely useful in the differential diagnosis, except in some situations (for ex. : low attenuation in pneumonia lipoídica and high attenuation in toxicity due to amiodarone). (33,34) Distortion of the architecture movements of the path and/or distortions in the morphology of anatomical structures, such as bronchi, vessels, cissuras or septa interlobulares, usually related to diseases parenchymal diffuse, particularly the fibrosantes. (7) On HRCT, the loss of definition of anatomical lobe secondary and the reduction of local volume are considered to be signs of distortion of the architecture lobular and may be considered to be signs of indirect fibrosis (Figure 13). (3) pulmonary Emphysema permanent enlargement of the airspace distal to the bronquíolo terminal, with destruction of the walls alveolar. (35) The criterion of histological additional "absence of fibrosis is obvious" has been questioned because some degree of interstitial fibrosis may be present as a result of smoking. (36) The emphysema is classified according to the region of the acinus affected: proximal (emphysema centroacinar or centrolobular), distal (emphysema parasseptal), or whole acinus (emphysema, panacinar or panlobular). (37) The ct scan findings but are areas of low attenuation, typically with no walls visible. (37,38) Emphysema bullous Destruction bullosa parenchyma associated with emphysema centroacinar, acinar distal (parasseptal) or panacinar (Figure 17). It is called emphysema bullous giant when the bubbles, which can vary from 1 to over 20 cm in diameter, occupy at least one-third of the hemitórax. (7,39) See also Bubble. Emphysema centroacinar Destruction of the walls of the alveoli centroacinares, associated to the increase of the respiratory bronchioles and of the alveoli that originate in these bronchioles. It is the most common form of emphysema in cigarette smokers. The ct scan findings but are areas centrolobulares of decreased attenuation, usually without walls visible, with the distribution not uniform, predominantly located in the upper lung regions (Figure 18). (37,38) The arteries centrolobulares can often be identified in urban areas hipodensas. The term centrolobular is commonly used as a synonym in the TC. Emphysema, interstitial Dissection of the interstitium and pulmonary air, typically located in the beams broncovasculares, in the septa interlobulares and in the visceral pleura, being more frequently identified in neonates undergoing mechanical ventilation (Figure 19). Emphysema interstitial is hardly recognized radiological in adults and is rarely identified in CT examinations. The process expresses as areas with a density of air with distribution leukocytosis, peribroncovascular and/or along the septa interlobulares (Figure 20), or as areas rounded low attenuation simulating small blisters or cysts (Figures 19 and 20). (40,41) Emphysema panacinar emphysema panacinar (panlobular) involves all portions of the acinus and, more or less evenly, the lobe pulmonary secondary. Predominates in lobes inferior and represents the form of emphysema linked to a deficiency of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. Emphysema panacinar manifests on CT as a decrease in generalized attenuation of lung, with reduction of the calibre of the blood vessels in the areas affected, with or without distortion of the same (Figure 21). (37,38,42) emphysema panacinar sharp can coexist and combine with the emphysema centroacinar serious. On CT scan, may be indistinguishable from findings of bronchiolitis constrictive serious. Emphysema parasseptal (distal acinar) Emphysema involving predominantly the alveoli distal to, their pipelines bags and alveolar. Characteristically, it is bounded by any surface pleural or septa interlobulares. On CT scan, characterized by areas of low attenuation in the regions subpleurais and peribroncovasculares, separated by the septum interlobular intact (Figure 22). (37,38) a Few times associated with the blisters. Air spaces Correspond to the spaces contained by the walls alveolar, including the bags and ducts alveolar, the alveoli in the walls of the respiratory bronchioles. (43) The term may be used in association with consolidation, opacity, or nodules, to characterize the origin of these lesions in this anatomical region lung, through the filling of these spaces with fluid or cells. The sign of the broncograma air (Figures 3 and 10) is the registered trademark of the filling of the air space. See also Broncograma air. Thickening of septa interlobulares Thickening of the septa of connective tissue separate the lobes of the lungs secondary. Characterized on the x-ray by the fine opacities are linear, also called lines B Kerley. Usually is in intimate contact with the surface of the pleural side, next to the breasts costofrênicos, featuring a right angle to the wall. Currently the terms "rows septal" or "thickening septal" have been preferred instead of lines of Kerley. On HRCT (Figure 23), the thickening of the septa interlobulares is characterized by the presence of opacities linear bounding the lobes of the lungs secondary, more easily characterisable in the region subpleural, where it has the aspect of lines perpendicular to the surface of the pleural. (3,44) In the central regions of the lungs, the thickening of the septa of the lobules adjacent results in the appearance of the arcades polygonal. The thickening nasal septum may be secondary to the alteration of any one of its components (veins, lymphatic vessels or connective tissue) and is a common finding in various pulmonary changes, although their presence is particularly highlighted in cases of pulmonary edema and linfangite other side effects. The thickening nasal septum can be of the flat type (Figure 23), nodular (Figure 24) or irregular. This differentiation can help in the differential diagnosis of the various etiologies. Structures centrolobulares central Region of the lobe pulmonary secondary, represented by the set pulmonary artery-bronquíolo and by interstitial pulmonary circunjacente. (45) In the HRCT of normal patients, corresponds to a small image, nodular or linear and located 3-10 mm from the surface of the pleural or septal interlobular, which represents the pulmonary artery, intralobular, with approximately 1 mm in diameter (Figure 25). (46,47) The bronquíolo corresponding, when normal, has walls with a thickness of approximately 0.15 mm, below the limits of resolution of HRCT. Therefore, the disease bronquiolar that produces accentuation of the structure centrolobular occurs when there is thickening of the wall or fill light bronquiolar (Figure 26). Standards centrolobulares include: (a) nodules; (b) the tree in budding; (c) thickening of the interstitium peribroncovascular device; and (d) areas with attenuation reduced without walls visible (emphysema). Faveolamento (honeycomb) Cysts of the lungs created by the destruction of the air spaces distal to, by fibrosis of the lung parenchyma, with derangement of the architecture of acini and bronchioles. The cysts faveolamento are lined by epithelium bronquiolar metaplásico and represent the stage terminal of various lung diseases. (1,48) In the HRCT, is characterized by multiple cysts, in the general location subpleural, with diameters similar (typically 0.3-1 cm), grouped in layers and share walls, well-defined, 1-3 mm thick (Figure 27). (49) Represents a marker ct of pulmonary fibrosis. The main causes include idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, colagenoses, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, chronic reactions pulmonary interactions, and asbestosis. (28) Should be differentiated from emphysema parasseptal and bronquiolectasia traction. Fibrosis massive progressive Confluence of small nodules, generally with fibrosis is associated with (Figure 28). They are often bilateral and predominate in wolves higher. It can be accompanied by an increase in irregular air space in their periphery. It is generally found in patients with a history of exposure important dust inorganic (for ex. : pneumoconiosis of coal miners of coal and silicosis). (50) ct scan Findings but similar can be found in sarcoidosis and talcosis. (51) Fissure (cissura) Invagination of the visceral pleura that covers the external surface of the lung into the parenchyma. (7) Each fissure interlobar is formed by the apposition of two layers of visceral pleura. In general, it identifies the fissures larger (oblique), which separate the lobes inferior of the other, and the fissure minor (horizontal), which separates the middle lobe from the upper lobe on the right (Figure 29). Some cracks supranumerárias can often be found. Interface Surface of separation between two structures or spaces. When the two structures thoracic with different densities radiological meet, their boundaries are fuzzy. For example, vessels with density of soft parts in contact with the density of air in the lung airy circunjacente. The "signal interface" defines the irregularity of the margins between different structures intratorácicas, such as vessels, bronchi and surfaces-pleural, in general as a result of the disease interstitial that causes fibrosis (Figure 30). (3) Interstitial Network of connective tissue that spreads through the lungs and is subdivided into: (a) interstitial axial (or broncovascular) - involves the bronchi, arteries and veins from the hilos up to the level of the respiratory bronchioles; (b) interstitium of the peripheral - composed by the connective tissue contiguous to the surfaces pleural (subpleural) and septa interlobulares; and (c) interstitium intralobular (also called acinar or parenquimatoso) - formed by the walls of the alveoli (septa alveolar), giving support to the structure of the lobe pulmonary secondary. (2,3,7) Linfonodomegalia Increase in volume of the lymph node of any etiology, when their dimensions exceed the limits considered normal for the chain lymph node in question (Figure 31). (52,53) The term "adenomegalia" is not a synonym recommended, as lymph nodes are not structures the gland true. The term "linfonodopatia" reserves for situations where it is possible to identify the disease lymph nodes, such as, for example, when identifying necrosis in its interior. Line curvilinear subpleural Opacity curvaceous 1-3 mm thickness, location subpleural, with a distribution parallel to its surface (Figure 32). It is an indicator of non-specific atelectasis, edema, fibrosis or inflammation. (3,7) Lines intralobulares Characterized at HRCT as the images of linear thin in the interior of the lobe pulmonary secondary, and, when pronounced, result in an appearance laced thin (Figure 33). This finding can be found in a number of situations, especially if the disease fibrosantes (for ex. : interstitial pneumonia usual) and those associated with the standard of pavement in mosaic (by ex. : proteinose alveolar). (3,54) See also Standard networking and Standard of pavement in mosaic. Lobe pulmonary secondary Smaller unit anatomical pulmonary delimited by septum of connective tissue. Presents aspect polyhedral, measuring from 1.0 to 2.5 cm in diameter and contains a varying number of acini. (45) The center lobe is formed by the set bronquíolo-pulmonary artery, lymphatics and interstitium adjacent. In its periphery, the connective tissue form septa thin, called septa interlobulares, where are the small pulmonary veins and lymphatic vessels (Figure 25). The septa interlobulares in normal patients are identified, the better, in the peripheral regions anterior, lateral, and justamediastinal of wolves the upper and middle, as well as in the periphery of the region diaphragmatic anterior lobes inferior, tending to be incomplete or absent in other regions of the lung. Are easily recognizable on HRCT always that the interstitium septal is compromised (Figures 23 and 24). (3) the Mass of Any space-occupying lesion in lung, pleural, mediastinal or chest wall, with density of soft parts, fat, or bone, greater than 3 cm, with contours at least partially defined, outside of the topography cissural, regardless of the characteristics of their contours or the heterogeneity of its contents (Figure 34). (7) Micetoma Characteristically represents a group of chronic infections subcutaneous caused by the inoculation of traumatic skin material contaminated with heat, mainly Nocardia brasiliensis, or eumicetos, resulting in actinomicetomas and eumicetomas, respectively. (20) Shows a tendency to invade the adjacent tissues, forming nodules or masses with cavities and routes fistulosos, with elimination of purulent secretion containing grains consisting of skeins of hyphae and filaments. In most cases, is located in the lower limbs, which may lead to deformities and fractures. The pulmonary involvement and pleural fluid is rare. (55) When they invade the lung, have the appearance of consolidation with necrosis, and pleural effusion can be identified. (56) Usually affects farmers, being endemic in Latin America, India and Africa. (20,57) The micetoma does not represent a colonization of cavity pulmonary pre-existing; therefore, the use of this term as a synonym of "fungal ball" should be avoided. See also fungal Ball. Nodule Opacity focal rounded, or at least partially enclosed, smaller than 3.0 cm in diameter, usually with density of soft parts or of calcium (Figure 35). When smaller than 10 mm, it is suggested to qualify it as a "small nodule". If smaller than 3 mm, the term "micronódulo" can be employed. (3,7) Should be described according to the characteristics of its margins (poorly defined or well defined), and also as to the location and the distribution (random, perilymphatic, centrolobular or pleural). As for attenuation, the nodule can be classified as solid (Figure 35a), when it obscures completely the parenchyma; non-solid (attenuation in frosted glass) when it obscures the margins of the vascular and bronchial walls (Figure 35b); or partially solid or semissólido (opacity of frosted glass with solid areas), when it obscures partially the margins of the vascular and the bronchial walls (Figure 35c). (7) See also Mass. Oligoemia Reduction in focal, regional or generalized blood volume of the lung. The oligoemia presents itself as a decrease in the caliber and number of pulmonary vessels in specific regions or diffusely, indicating that the blood flow is lower than usual (Figure 36). (3,7) Opacity Image that is distinguished, at least partially, of the structures that surround or overlap, for increased display density. In chest radiography, this term does not imply their nature from the point of view pathological, their size or location-specific, and may be a source of pulmonary, pleural, chest wall, or from the external source to the patient. In the CT scan, the opacities of the lungs can represent opacity in frosted glass or consolidation. See also Consolidation. Opacity (attenuation) in frosted glass On TC, corresponds to the increased density of the pulmonary parenchyma that remain visible, the contours of the vessels and bronchi in the interior of the area affected by a pathological process (Figure 37). This standard image is related to the thickening of the interstitium, filling in the partial air spaces, partial collapse of alveoli, increased blood volume capillary or a combination of these mechanisms. (58,59) Should be distinguished from "consolidation" (Figures 10 and 38), in which the vessels are not identifiable in the interior of the area of lung compromised. See also Consolidation. Opacity linear Image linear, thin, elongated, with a density of tissue of soft parts. Rarely, the presence of calcification or foreign material can increase the attenuation. It is a term not specific and etiologies various. It is recommended, whenever possible, to use terminology more specific, such as "atelectasis laminar", "band parenchymal" and "thickening of septa interlobulares". Opacity drop-down Opacity subpleural regions of lung pending, which correspond to areas of atelectasis resulting from decubitus. Occurs in posterior regions when the patient is supine (Figure 39a) and in the anterior regions, when in ventral decubitus. Disappears with the change in decubitus position (Figure 39b). (4) Opacity parenchymal (Opacification parenchymal) Increased attenuation of the lung parenchyma that may or may not obscure the contours of the vessels and bronchi. The term "consolidation" indicates that the margins of these structures are not apparent (except by the broncogramas air), and "mitigation frosted glass" indicates that, though changed the density of the lungs, and the airways are still identifiable. (4,32), we Should give preference to more specific terms "consolidation" and "opacity of frosted glass" (Figure 38). Tree pattern in budding Opacities, branching centrolobulares, with small nodulações in the extremities, resembling the appearance of the budding of some trees (Figure 26). (3,45) Represent, in most cases, the bronchioles dilated and filled by the material as pathological, although it can also be related with the infiltration of the connective tissue peribroncovascular centrolobular or, occasionally, with dilatation, or the fill (for ex. : metastases intravascular) of the pulmonary arteries centrolobulares. (60,61) Means, in general, disease of the airways, being particularly common in infectious processes (for ex. : tuberculosis, broncopneumonia, and bronchiolitis infectious), but can also be found in a number of other diseases (for ex. : bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis and panbronquiolite). (47) Standard attenuation (perfusion) in the mosaic Appearance in retail of regions with attenuation different that may represent disease parenchymal infiltrativa, illness obliterativa of the small airways or disorder vascular occlusive (Figure 40). (62,63) The entrapment of air secondary to obstruction, bronchial or bronquiolar can produce outbreaks parenquimatosos reduction of the attenuation, which is accentuated on CT images obtained in the expiratory phase. (8) In the illness obliterativa of the small airways and in disorder vascular occlusive areas with attenuation decreased are the abnormal and generally contain pulmonary vessels in number and size smaller than the lung normal adjacent, which may have attenuation normal or increased (because of the redirection of blood flow). The pattern of attenuation in the mosaic may also be produced by disease of pulmonary parenchymal, characterized by opacity of frosted glass, and in this condition the areas of higher attenuation represent the regions affected, and the other areas are foci of the lung is preserved. (3,7) also See Trapping air. Standard paving, mosaic-Overlay-glass opacities, lines intralobulares and thickening of septa interlobulares (Figure 41). The interface between the lung normal and the affected tends to be well-bounded in this pattern of lung injury. This pattern was initially identified in patients with proteinose alveolar lung but is also found in other lung diseases, diffuse in which the compartments interstitial and alveolar are committed (by ex. : lung hemorrhage). The term in English is "crazy paving". (1,2,64) Standard nodular centrolobular Pattern of distribution of small nodules that occupy the central portion of the lobe pulmonary secondary, in general related to diseases of the bronquíolo, pulmonary artery or of the sheath and conjunctiva peribroncovascular. (7) The main feature of ct scan is that they maintain a few millimeters of separation from the surface of pleura and of fissures (Figure 42A). (45-47) The most common causes are diseases that occur by inhalation (for ex. : hypersensitivity pneumonitis, silicosis, and bronchiolitis respiratory). If accompanied by tree pattern in budding (Figure 26), infectious causes should be kept in mind (for ex. : tuberculosis and broncopneumonia). Standard nodular perilinfático distribution Pattern of small nodules along the lymphatic network of pulmonary septa interlobulares, hem conjunctiva peribroncovascular and surface pleura) (Figure 42b). The main diseases that evolve with nodules perilinfáticos are sarcoidosis and the linfangite other side effects. (45,65) Standard nodular miliary - See Standard nodular random (miliary). Standard nodular random (miliary) Pattern of distribution of small nodules in a random way by the lungs (Figure 42c). The most common causes are the miliary tuberculosis, histoplasmosis miliary and metastases hematogênicas. (3,45,65) Pattern perilobular This pattern is characterized by the distribution of the abnormality along the structures that border the lobes of the lungs, that is, the endpoint of interlobulares, the visceral pleura and large pulmonary vessels. (66) The term is more often used in the context of disease (for ex. : pneumonia in the organization perilobular) that are mainly distributed around the periphery of the lobe secondary. In CT, it is characterized by the presence of opacities polygonal thick and irregular in the periphery of the lobe pulmonary secondary (Figure 43). (67) Should be distinguished from the thickening of septa interlobulares (default septal), for being thicker and irregular; and the sign of the halo inverted. See also Standard septal and Sign of the halo inverted. Default reticular Change, usually related to diseases interstitial, characterized on radiographs by numerous small opacities, linear which result in the appearance of the network. (1) In the HRCT, it is possible to identify the components responsible for this pattern on the x-ray, which usually are related to the presence of lines intralobulares and septal (Figure 44) or the presence of cysts whose walls show up as lines on the radiograph, such as the diseases, cystic pulmonary, in emphysema associated with the bubbles and even in the cysts faveolamento. (1,3,7) See also Lines intralobulares. Plaque pleural Thickening pleural focal, sometimes with calcifications, variable thickness and with the extension of up to 5 cm (Figure 45). (68) Usually occurs on the surface of pleural parietal subcostal or in the pleura diaphragmatic. When multiple and bilateral, are almost always arising from exposure to asbestos. (69,70) Pneumatocele content Space gas whose wall is formed by air spaces distendidos. Often changes size in a short space of time, due to the mechanism of the valvular obstructive airway, which is characteristic. (71) is Often associate to some diseases infectious diseases, especially those caused by Staphylococcus sp. in children and Pneumocystis sp. in adults. In CT, it manifests as air-space rounded, demarcated by thin walls, contained in the lung (Figure 46a). (3,7) Can resolve spontaneously, albeit late in the course of the treatment of the infection (Figure 46b). Pseudocavidade Represents an area of rounded or oval low-attenuation coefficient in nodules or masses in the lung or in an area of consolidation secondary to: 1) the presence of a portion of the pulmonary parenchyma preserved; 2) the presence of the bronchia dilated or even normal caliber; or 3) an area of emphysema in the interior of the lesion (Figure 47). These pseudocavidades usually measure less than 1 cm in diameter. Can be identified in patients with adenocarcinoma, squamous bronquioloalveolar and pneumonia. (7,72) Pseudoplaca Opacity in lung periphery, adjacent to the visceral pleura, which is formed by small nodules coalescing that simulate plaque pleural fluid (Figure 48). (73) Most commonly found in sarcoidosis, silicosis and pneumoconiosis of miners of coal. Sign of the signet ring Signal composed of an opacity ring finger, which represents a brônquio enlarged, in association with an opacity rounded, smaller, contiguous with its wall, representing your artery (pulmonary or rarely bronchial) which recalls the appearance of a "signet ring" or "ring of pearl". (74) Corresponds to the sign of ct basics of bronchiectasis (Figure 12). (26,75) Occasionally, the sign of the signet ring can also be found in diseases characterized by a reduction in abnormal arterial flow to the lungs, such as pulmonary thromboembolism and chronic interruption to the proximal pulmonary artery. (76) See also Bronchiectasis. Sign of the growing air Collection of air of varying size and in the shape of a meniscus, or half-moon located on the periphery of a nodule or mass with density of soft parts, being characteristic, in the context of appropriate clinical, pulmonary aspergillosis angioinvasiva in the recovery phase (Figure 49). (77-79) in This case, the sign of the rising air is due to the retraction of the lung parenchyma infartado and resorption of necrotic tissue at the periphery of the lesion, with filling of the space between the slough and the adjacent parenchyma by air. (78) it is customary also to employ it in the description of the findings of the fungal ball, in which one observes a collection of air surrounding the lesion, the intracavitary or interposed between the top wall of the cavity is pre-existing and injury intracavitary drop-down (Figure 7). (7) the sign of The crescent air has also been described in other diseases, such as bleeding intracavitary, bacterial abscess and lung cancer. (80,81) See also fungal Ball. Sign of the halo Opacity of frosted glass that surrounds a nodule, mass or area of consolidation, rounded (Figure 50). It was initially described as a sign of hemorrhage around a focus of aspergillosis angioinvasiva,(82) being quite specific in the context of patient neutropênico feverish, surging early. (82) the signal from The halo may be caused by hemorrhage associated with other types of disease (for ex. candidiasis, kaposi's sarcoma) or by pulmonary infiltrates local neoplasia. (83-86) the Sign of the halo inverted Opacity focal in frosted glass surrounded by a ring of consolidation, full or partial (Figure 51). Initially described as a sign of pneumonia in the organization, was, however, associated with other diseases, such as paracoccidioidomicose. (87,88) Signal of the septum, nodular (in accounts, in rosario) Thickening with irregular and nodular of the septa interlobulares with the appearance of a string of beads (Figure 24). (7) Although initially described as a sign of linfangite other side effects, it is more frequently found in sarcoidosis. (89) Acknowledgements Dedication special: Dr. Jorge Issamu Kavakama, radiologist brilliant that has influenced generations with his talent, charisma, and enthusiasm and was an active participant in the drafting and dissemination of the other versions of the brazilian consensus on the terminology of the descriptors of CT of the thorax. 