SUMMARY BACKGROUND: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have extra-articular manifestations in 50% of cases OBJECTIVE: To study the prevalence of pulmonary abnormalities on computed tomography scan of patients with RA and their association with demographic, clinical, serological and therapies. METHOD: We studied 71 patients with RA by mens of age of onset, disease duration, sex, smoking, presence of rheumatoid nodules, secondary Sjögren's syndrome, rheumatoid factor, presence of anti-CCP and antinuclear, respiratory complaints, use of medicine, and pulmonary findings on HRCT scans. RESULTS: There were tomographic findings in 55% of patients, the most common being reticular lesions, parenchymal bands, traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing. None of the clinical variables studied were associated with CT findings except that disease duration was greater in patients with pulmonary nodules and reticular lesions (frosted glass). CONCLUSIONS: There is a high prevalence of CT findings in RA population, which are not associated with clinical, serological, therapeutic or demographic variables except for duration of the disease. Keywords: rheumatoid arthritis; lung injury; tomography.     INTRODUCTION Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a relatively common disease that affects about 1% of the population, focusing primarily on women.1 Characterized by the presence of an additive polyarthritis with high deformative potential, RA is a systemic disease that, among other organs, involves the lungs.2 The spectrum of pulmonary manifestations of RA is broad, ranging from pleuritis and nodules to interstitial.2 There is great variability in the literature on the prevalence of pulmonary abnormalities in these patients. Some of this variability can be explained by the genetic background of the population studied, considering the influence of genes such as HLA DR4 and HLA DR1,2,3 among others, the phenotype of the disease. Polymorphisms of genes HLA-B40 and B54 are associated with the presence of pulmonary changes, especially with fibrosis and bronquiolites.4,5 In addition, drugs used in the treatment of this entity may affect, in part, the lung lesions in a patient with RA. Leflunomide, methotrexate and sulfasalazine have been implicated in interstitial lung diseases,2 and methotrexate6 and leflunomide7 are considered possible inducers on the appearance of nodules, not only peripherals such as visceral. The smoke, in turn, a potentially harmful agent to the lungs is also an aggravating factor of RA, causing the emergence not only of a more aggressive disease as well as more extra-articular lesions.3 In this study we sought to analyze the tomographic findings of RA patients from a population of a single rheumatology center in southern Brazil, and its possible correlation with clinical and serologic findings of the disease.   MATERIALS AND METHODS This study was approved by the local Ethics Committee in Research and obtained informed consent from participants. 71 patients were studied with at least four classification criteria of the American College of Rheumatology for RA,8 being 10 men and 61 women aged from 31 to 84 years old (average 58.7 ± 10.4) and average disease duration 11.8 ± 6.9 years. Patients were selected according to the order of the scheduled consultation and the agreement to participate in the study. Pregnant patients and patients with chronic pulmonary obstructive disease, previous history of tuberculosis, history of surgery and irradiation in the ribcage were excluded. The data observed by medical records analysis included: early age of RA, the presence of nodules, Sjögren syndrome associated, 9 presence of autoantibodies such as rheumatoid factor (RF), citrullinated cyclic antipeptides (CCP) and antinuclear antibodies (ANA), use of drugs and exposure to smoking (current smokers and ex-smokers). Next, using a structured interview, we obtained data on the current presence of respiratory symptoms (coughing, thoracic pain and dyspnoea) and index function.10 All patients underwent high-resolution computed tomography (CT), supine, using CT scans of the brand Siemens Somatom SpiritT 2 channels and GE Healthcare LightSpeed Pro.16 channels. We used the following technique: axial slices were obtained at full inspiration, with from 1 to 2 mm thick slices, time interval 500 MS 1.5 seconds 10-mm increments, image reconstruction with high matrix resolution (512 x 512), average level of -700 to -1000 HU window for evaluation of the lung parenchyma, with a width of 1,000 HU window. For the evaluation of the mediastinum, a window around 30-50 HU was used, with a window width of 400 HU, with 120 kVp and amperage automatically modulated (120 to 250 mA). An EV iodized contrast medium was not administered at any stage of the examination. Some tests showed multiplanar reformatting. The CT scans were read by two radiologists, one of them (DLE) with exclusive dedication in Thoracic Radiology, who were not aware of the other patient data. For statistical analysis, the findings were classified into three main groups: a) Pulmonary lesions with increased lung density: typical posterior and peripheral frosted glass; Atypical frosted glass; focal typical frosted glass; consolidated with no focal segmental; consolidated with no multifocal segmental; focal segmental consolidation. b) Pulmonary lesions with nodular pattern: perilymphatic nodules, centrilobular nodules, random nodules, nodules in-bud (with branches) excavated and massive. c) Pulmonary lesions with reticular pattern: peribronchial thickening, septal thickening, thickening of interlobular interstitial, parenchymal bands, architectural distortion, traction bronchiectasis, honeycombing. The data were collected in frequency and contingency tables; Fisher test and chi-square test for association tests of nominal variables and Mann Whitney and Student unpaired for numeric variables with the aid of Graph Pad Prism software were used. Adopted significance of 5%.   RESULTS Analysis of the study population The RA early age in the sample ranged from 22 to 73 years (mean 43.9 ± 11.0 years). About 24/67 (35.8%) were smokers and former smokers and 43/67 (64.1%) were not exposed to smoke. Had rheumatoid nodules in 11/68 (16.1%) and secondary Sjögren's syndrome in 9/61 (14.7%). In 51/71 (71.8%) were positive for RF; in 24/32 (75%) had the presence of anti-CCP antibody and in 19/69 (27.5%) there was a positive for ANA. With regard to functional class 27/66 (40.9%) were grade 1; 29/66 (43.9%) were grade 2; 3/66 (4.5%) were class 3 and 7/66 (10.6%) were 4. The treatment included azathioprine 4/71 (5.6%), leflunomide in 24/71 (33.8%), methotrexate at 45/71 (63.3%), anti-TNF-α in 7/71 (9, 8%), sulfasalazine in 11/71 (15.4%), and antimalarials 43/71 (60.5%). With regard to respiratory complaints: there was dyspnea in 12/65 (18.4%); cough in 6/66 (9.0%) and chest pain in 29/66 (43.9%). In 30/67 (44.7%) patients had no complaints for the respiratory tract. Tomographic findings of this population are shown in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 1.                 Associated studies with parenchymal density show increased tomography findings of the analyzed cases with increased parenchymal density on CT (present in 23/71 or 32.3%) shown in the data of Table 2. As can be seen, none of the variables studied was associated with CT findings in question, except the presence of chest pain - which proved to be a negative association. Associated study of pulmonary lesions of nodular pattern Analysis of cases that showed the presence of nodules (present in 7/71 to 9.8%) resulted in findings in Table 3. This table depicts a greater presence of nodules in diseases with longer evolution time. Associated study with reticular pattern of lesions. The result of the association analysis of the presence of reticular pattern lesions (present in 27/71 or 38%) with the variables is shown in Table 4. Again, the only positive association is the presence of reticular lesions in patients with longer duration of disease.   DISCUSSION RA is traditionally considered a disease involving the joints. However, it is estimated that up to 50% of patients have some kind of extra-articular manifestations, including: serositis, pneumonitis, peripheral neuritis, nodules, scleritis etc. 2 In this study, we reviewed the prevalence of pulmonary manifestations observed through high resolution tomography in a group of patients in Southern Brazil, seeking to correlate these findings with clinical, serological and treatment variables. The analysis of data from this study shows that most patients with RA (55% of) have some kind of tomographic change. This high prevalence of findings can be confirmed by other authors as Zrour et al.11 who found alterations in 49.3% of 75 patients in Tunisia, and Bilgicki et al.3 who found them in 67.3% of 52 patients in Turkey. Also Teraski et al., 12 studying patients with RA and who also had respiratory symptoms found tomographic findings in 90% of them. The most frequent changes were reticular followed by increased parenchymal density. There are few positive associations with demographic and clinical findings. Study describes that the interstitial lung disease tends to be more common in males, those with presence of RF in high titles and with more severe and deforming joint disease.13,14 However, such findings could not be confirmed in our sample, which noted an equal distribution in both genders, in different functional classes, and those with and without RF, anti CCP and ANA, although it was not an analysis of the titles of these autoantibodies. Similarly, the series studied by Bilgicki et al.3 also demonstrated no association of lung injury with males. On the other hand, in our study, it was demonstrated that nodular and reticular lesions are more common in RA patients with longer duration of disease. The association between RA lung disease with smoking is controversial. The use of tobacco has been identified as a predisposing factor for lung disease in RA by several authors, 15,16 but others have demonstrated a lack of association between these two variables, 3 as can be observed in these data. It is interesting to observe that it failed to show any association between the CT findings and respiratory symptoms, cough and dyspnoea. Some explanations are possible for these findings. The first is that RA patients suffering from many musculoskeletal disorders, may have chest pain not associated with pulmonary causes. The second is the difficulty of mobilizing these patients generated by secondary inability to RA, does not allow the perception of dyspnea except in more advanced situations. Finally, in this series, none of the drugs studied were shown to be associated with CT findings. Methotrexate is currently the disease-modifying drug most widely used in the treatment of RA and has been associated with lung toxicity. No data exist about pulmonary involvement by methotrexate in our population. Cotin et al.17 showed that there was a deterioration of lung function in patients using methotrexate, but these findings were not clinically significant. Others found no changes in function or tomographic findings in RA patients undergoing different types of treatment.3 The present study has limitations for the number of patients in the sample (n = 71) and retrospective analysis of laboratory data (ANA, RF and anti CCP). The first may be responsible for statistical error type 2, preventing the appearance of some associations with the studied variables. In conclusion it may be said that, in our population of RA, there is a high prevalence of tomographic anomalies, with the most common being reticular pattern and increased parenchymal density. These changes do not have a link with sex of the patient, presence of autoantibodies, functional class, and smoking; reticular changes and nodules are more common in those with long-term illness. Finally, no association was found between CT findings and use of different types of medications used to treat RA.   