 SUMMARY RATIONALE: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (ra) have extra-articular manifestations in up to 50% of cases AIM: to Study the prevalence of pulmonary changes on high resolution computed tomography in patients with ra and its association with demographic variables, clinical variables, serologic and therapeutic. METHOD: we Studied 71 patients with ra to the age of onset of the disease, time of disease, sex, smoking, presence of nodules reumatoides, Sjögren's syndrome secondary, rheumatoid factor, presence of anti-CCP and antinuclear factor, respiratory complaints, use of medications and pulmonary findings to the tomography of high resolution. RESULTS: there Were changes to tomographic in 55% of patients, the most common being the presence of frosted glass, bands, parenchymal, bronchiectasis and traction faveolamento. None of the clinical variables studied was associated with the ct scan findings but, except for the duration of the disease was greater in patients with nodules and lesions reticular (frosted glass). CONCLUSIONS: There is a high prevalence of changes of tomographic in the population of AIR, which does not associate with clinical variables, serologic, therapeutic, and demographic unless the duration of the illness. Key words: rheumatoid arthritis; pulmonary injury; ct scan. INTRODUCTION rheumatoid arthritis (ra) is a disease relatively common that affects around 1% of the population, focusing primarily on women.1 Characterized by the presence of a polyarthritis, additive with high potential for crippling, the ra is a systemic disease that, among other organs, involves the lungs.2 The spectrum of manifestations of lung of AIR is broad, going from pleurites and nodules the lesions interstitial.2 There is a great variability in the literature concerning the prevalence of pulmonary changes in these patients. Part of this variability can be explained by the background genetic make-up of population studied, considering the influence of genes such as the HLA DR4 and HLA DR1,2,3 among others, the phenotype of this disease. Polymorphisms of the genes of the HLA-B40 and B54 are associated with the presence of pulmonary disorders, particularly fibrosis and bronchiolitis.4,5 in addition, the drugs used in the treatment of this entity can respond in part by the pulmonary findings in a patient with AIR. Leflunomide, methotrexate and sulfasalazine have been implicated in lung diseases, interstitial,2 metotrexato6 and leflunomida7 are considered to be potential inducers of appearance of nodules not only peripherals such as the visceral. The smoke, in turn, an agent potentially harmful for the lungs is, also, an aggravating factor of the AIR, resulting in the emergence not only of a disease more aggressive as more extra-articular manifestations.3 In the present work, we sought to study the findings of ct of the patients with ra in a population from a single center rheumatology in the South of Brazil, and its possible correlation with clinical findings and serological of the disease. MATERIAL AND METHODS This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the local being obtained free and informed consent of the participants. We studied 71 patients with a minimum of four criteria for the classification of the American College of Rheumatology for ra,8 with 10 men and 61 women, with ages between 31 and 84 years (mean of 58.7 ± 10,4) and mean time of disease duration of 11.8 ± 6.9 years. The patients were chosen according to the order of the scheduled visit and agreement to participate in the study. Excluded were pregnant patients, with COPD, prior history of tuberculosis, history of surgery and irradiation in the rib cage. The data observed by analysis of medical records included: age at the beginning of the AIR, presence of nodules, Sjögren's syndrome associated with,9 the presence of autoantibodies such as rheumatoid factor (RF), antipeptídeo cyclic citrullinated (CCP) and factor antinuclear (FAN), use of medications and exposure to smoke (current smokers and ex-smokers). The following, through a structured interview, we obtained data as to the current presence of respiratory complaints (cough, chest pain, and dyspnea) and functional index.10 All of these patients were submitted to computed tomography (CT), high-resolution supine, using a ct scanner from the Siemens Somatom SpiritT 2-channel and GE Healthcare LightSpeed Pro.The 16 channels. We used the following technique: axial sections were obtained at maximal inspiration, with cuts of a thickness of 1 to 2 mm, time interval of 500 ms - 1.5 seconds, increased to 10 mm, and reconstruction of the image matrix with high resolution (512 x 512), the average level of the window of -700 to -1.000 HU for the evaluation of the pulmonary parenchyma, with the width of the window of 1,000 HU. For the evaluation of the mediastinum has been used, a window around 30-50 HU, with width of window 400 HU, with 120 Kvp and amperage modulated automatically (120 to 250 mA). Was not administered contrast medium EV iodized at any stage of the examination. Some tests had reformatações multiplanares. The ct scans were read by two radiologists, one of them (DLE) with exclusive dedication in Radiology of the Chest, which were not aware of the other data of the patients. For the purposes of statistical analysis, the findings were classified in three main groups: a) pulmonary Lesions with increased density of the lung: frosted glass typical posterior and peripheral; glass frosted atypical; frosted glass typical focal; commit not to target focal; consolidation of non-segmental multifocal; consolidation target focal. (b) pulmonary Lesions with standard nodular: the nodules perilinfáticos, nodules centrolobulares, nodules, random, nodules in budding (branching) of nodules, cavitated, and masses. c) pulmonary Lesions with a pattern reticular: thickening peribrônquico, thickening septal thickening of interstitium intralobular, bands, parenchymal, distortion, architectural, bronchiectasis traction, faveolamento. The obtained data were collected in frequency tables and contingency; were used in the tests of Fisher and Chi-square for tests of association of nominal variables and the Mann-Whitney and t-Student unpaired for numeric variables with the aid of the software Graph Pad Prism. Significance level adopted is 5%. RESULTS Analysis of the studied population The age of onset of ra in the study sample ranged between 22 and 73 years (mean 43.9 ± 11,0 years). About 24/67 (35,8%) were smokers and ex-smokers, and 43/67 (64,1%) had not been exposed to smoke. There were nodules reumatoides in 11/68 (16.1 percent), and Sjögren's syndrome secondary in 9/61 (14.7 per cent). In 51/71 (71,8%) were positive for FR; in 24/32 (75%) had the presence of the antibody anti-CCP, and in 19/69 (27.5% of) there was positivity for the FAN. With regard to the functional class 27/66 (40,9%) were class 1; 29/66 (43.9% in) were class 2, 3/66 (4.5%) and were grade 3 and 7/66 (10,6%) were 4. The treatment included azathioprine in 4/71 (5.6 percent), leflunomide in 24/71 (33.8 percent), methotrexate in 45/71 (63,3%), anti-TNF-α in 7/71 (9.8 percent), sulfasalazine in 11/71 (15,4%) and antimalarial drugs in 43/71 (a 60.5%). With regard to respiratory complaints: there was dyspnoea in 12/65 (18.4 percent); cough in 6/66 (9,0%) and chest pain in 29/66 (43.9% in). In 30/67 (44.7 percent) of the patients had complaints related to the respiratory system. The findings of ct in this population are presented in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 1. Association studies with findings of increased density of parenchyma on the ct scan the analysis of The cases with increased density of parenchyma on the ct scan (present in 23/71 or 32,3%), showed the data of Table 2. As can be seen, none of the variables studied showed association with the changes tomographic in question, except for the presence of chest pain - that has been shown to be a negative association. Association study of pulmonary lesions of default nodular the analysis of The cases that showed the presence of nodules (present in 7/71-9,8%) resulted in the findings of Table 3. In this table, we highlight the increasing presence of nodules in the diseases with a greater time of evolution. Study of the association with lesions of default reticular The result of analysis of the association of the presence of lesions standard reticular (present in 27/71 or 38%) with the studied variables is shown in Table 4. Again, the only positive association is the presence of lesions reticular in patients with disease of longer duration. DISCUSSION THE AIR is considered to be a traditional way a disease that involves the joints. However, it is estimated that up to 50% of patients have some kind of manifestation of extra-articular, including: serosites, pneumonites, neuritis, peripheral nodules, esclerites etc.2 in This study, we reviewed the prevalence of the manifestations of the lung as seen in the tomography of high resolution in a group of patients from Southern Brazil, aiming to correlate these findings with clinical variables, serologic and treatment. The analysis of the data from the present study shows that the majority of patients with ra (55% of them) have some kind of change in ct scan. This high prevalence of findings can be confirmed by other authors such as Zrour et al.11que found changes in 49,3% of 75 patients from Tunisia, for Bilgicki et al.3 that were found in 67,3% of 52 patients in Turkey. Already Teraski et al.,12 studying patients with ra, and who also had respiratory symptoms found changes tomographic in 90% of them. The changes most prevalent were the in appearance to the reticular followed by the increased density of the parenchyma. A few were positive associations with findings demographic and clinical. Describes the interstitial lung disease tends to be more common in male patients, in those with presence of RF in high titers and with joint disease more serious and crippling.13,14 However, these findings could not be confirmed in our sample, where we noticed an equal distribution in the two genders, in the different functional classes and those with and without RF, anti-CCP, and FAN, although it has not been an analysis of the titles of these autoantibodies. In a similar way, the series studied by Bilgicki et al.3também showed no association of lung injury with the male sex. On the other hand, in our study, it was demonstrated that lesions nodular and reticular are more common in patients of AIR with the longer time of disease. Already the association between lung disease of ra with smoking is controversial. The use of smoke has been identified as a predisposing factor for pulmonary disease in the AIR by several authors,15,16 but others have already demonstrated a lack of association between these two variables,3 such as can be observed in the present data. It is interesting to observe that it failed to demonstrate any association between the findings of ct scan and the respiratory complaints of pain, cough and dyspnoea. Some explanations are possible for these findings. The first of these is that patients AIR, suffering from the many changes and musculoskeletal, can exhibit chest pain not associated with the causes of the lungs. The second is that the difficulty of mobilization of these patients, generated by disability secondary to ra, does not allow the perception of dyspnea in more advanced situations. Finally, in the present series, none of the drugs studied showed to associate the changes tomographic. Methotrexate is now the drug modifier of disease more used in the treatment of ra and has been associated with pulmonary toxicity. There are no data about lung involvement by methotrexate in our population. Cotin et al.17 have shown there is a deterioration in lung function in patients users of methotrexate, however these findings were not significant clinically. Others have not found changes in function, or the findings of ct in patients with AR subjected to different types of treatment.3 The present study has as limitations the number of patients in the sample (n = 71) and the retrospective analysis of laboratory data (FAN, RF and anti-CCP). The first of these may be responsible for statistics error of type 2, preventing the onset of some associations with the studied variables. In conclusion, one can say that, in our population of AIR, there is a high prevalence of abnormalities on the ct scan, the most common being the standard reticular and of increased density of the parenchyma. These changes do not keep association with the sex of the patient, the presence of auto-antibodies, functional class, and smoking; changes in reticular and nodules are more common in those with disease of long duration. Finally, no association was found between changes tomographic and the use of different types of drugs used for treatment of the AIR. 