ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Although studies have shown a high diagnostic accuracy of CT Coronary multidetector (MDCT) in Coronary Artery Disease Detection (CAD) data on the prognostic value of this method is limited. To determine the value of MDCT in the prediction of adverse clinical outcomes in patients with suspected CAD. METHODS: We prospectively evaluated 355 consecutive patients (average age 58 ± 12 years; 252 male) with suspected CAD, between January 2008 and June 2010. CAD by MDCT was defined as the presence of atheromatous plaques observed in any coronary artery. Adverse clinical outcomes were defined as death, myocardial infarction, unstable angina or myocardial revascularization. RESULTS: During an average follow-up of 15 months, there were 55 cardiac events. In the multivariate analysis using the Cox regression model, NYHA functional class, diabetes, smoking and atherosclerosis to MDCT were predictors of adverse clinical outcome, and the presence of plaque on MDCT is strongly associated with the adverse clinical outcomes, regardless of factors established risk for CHD (hazard ratio 5.29; confidence interval of 95%, 2.4 to 11.8; p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: The presence of atherosclerosis demonstrated by MDCT in patients with suspected CAD presented independent and incremental value to conventional risk factors in the prediction of adverse clinical outcomes, and may prove useful in the risk stratification of these patients. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012; [Online].ahead print, PP.0-0) Keywords: Coronary disease; Computed tomography; Prognosis.     Introduction Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is a major cause of mortality and morbidity in the world, with important socioeconômico1 impact. The Tomography Coronary multidetector (MDCT) is an important method for evaluation of the coronary arteries with high accuracy in the diagnosis of arterial disease coronariana2-5. However, although previous studies have shown its role in events prediction adversos6-12, validation has not been fully determined. The objective of this study was to evaluate the value of MDCT in the prediction of adverse clinical outcomes in patients with suspected CAD.   Methods January 2008 to December 2010, consecutive patients with suspected CAD that underwent MDCT were allocated in a cohort of prospective data collection. Patients were referred because of various indications, including the assessment of symptoms, signs of heart disease (abnormal resting ECG or positive stress test) or asymptomatic patients with presence of two or more risk factors for CAD. Exclusion criteria were known CAD, acute coronary syndrome, cardiac arrhythmia, allergy to iodinated contrast and kidney failure. Informed consent was obtained from all patients. On admission, a collection of standardized data on the presence of cardiac risk factors was filled by each individual. Hypertension was defined as a documented history of high blood pressure or treatment with antihypertensive drugs. The presence of diabetes mellitus was defined by previous diagnosis of diabetes and / or use of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents. Dyslipidemia was determined as previous history of dyslipidemia or current treatment with lipid-lowering drugs. It was considered smoking the habit of smoking or smoking cessation within three months of the exam. For the definition of functional class, we used the classification based on the New York Heart Association (NYHA). Family history of coronary artery disease was defined as the presence of CAD in first-degree relatives under the age of 55 (men) or 65 (women) years of age. It was used tomograph 64 channels (Aquilion, Toshiba Medical Company, Japan), and the images of the entire heart were acquired in apnea 6 to 8 s, with intravenous infusion 85-90 mL of iodinated contrast (Iopamiron 350) in pump infusion flow rate of 5 ml / s. Automatic contrast detection ROI was positioned in the descending aorta (150 HU), initiating the acquisition of images. CF patients greater than 70 bpm and without contraindications received 15 mg of intravenous metoprolol. The images were reconstructed with thick slices of 0.3 mm to 0.4 mm intervals, with retrospective gating. All data was analyzed by physicians experienced in the method, using multiplanar reformatting and 3-D reconstruction by the "volume rendering" technique. The coronary arteries were divided into 17 segments13. Segments were evaluated for the presence of an atherosclerotic plaque structures with defined as > 1 mm2 in and / or adjacent the light coronary artery. After that, it was determined whether the lesion was obstructive or not, using a threshold of 50% luminal narrowing. The percentage of obstruction of the coronary artery lumen was based on a comparison of the luminal diameter of the obstruction compared to the luminal diameter immediately proximal to the plaque. Patients without calcium in the coronary artery or coronary plaques on MDCT were considered normal, and abnormal MDCT defined as the presence of any coronary plaque. Adverse clinical outcomes of the patients were obtained through telephone interview and were classified as the occurrence of: 1) cardiac death; 2) myocardial infarction; 3) unstable angina associated with hospitalization; or 4) revascularization. Statistical analysis The demographic and clinical characteristics of the study population were expressed as numbers and percentages for categorical variables and as average and standard deviation for continuous variables, compared with chi-square test for categorical variables and the Student t test for continuous variables. To satisfy the assumption of independence of the events, the recurrence of cardiac events, in one of participants, was not included in the analysis. The Cox regression model was used to assess the value of clinical variables and the presence of plaques to the MDCT, in predicting cardiac events. Initially, univariate analysis of clinical variables and the MDCT was performed to identify potential predictors. Hazard ratios were calculated with 95% confidence interval as an estimate of the risk associated with a particular variable. Subsequently, multivariate analysis was performed, including all the variables selected in the univariate analysis. The incremental value of each variable in the model was tested using the likelihood ratio, getting the chi-square and comparing to the previous model. Statistical analyzes were performed using SPSS software (version 18.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois) and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.   Results During the study period, 405 patients were initially selected; 21 were excluded for indication of post-surgery assessment of myocardial revascularization and 29 for post-angioplasty evaluation. In total, 355 consecutive patients were included in the study, 71.8% men, mean age 58.4 ± 12.4 years. The general characteristics of the patients are summarized in Table 1. Indications for examinations MDCT were the following: evaluation of chest pain in 131 patients (32.4%); positive results of the stress test (133 patients [33%]); asymptomatic patients with two or more risk factors (110 patients [27.2%]); and other causes in 30 patients (7.4%). Presence of coronary plaques fig. 1a) were found in 55.8% of patients and 28.5% in the right coronary artery, 23.7% in the circumflex artery, and 40.6% in the anterior descending artery. coronary artery with lesions higher than 50% (Fig. 1b) were found 7.7% in the right coronary artery, left circumflex artery in 5.4% and 9.4% in the left anterior descending artery. The mean follow-up was 15 months (range 3-43 months) and was conducted in 321 patients (90.4%). To determine whether the loss on the following could represent an influence on the results, a comparative analysis between the groups with and without follow-up was performed, showing no difference in age, sex, smoking, hypertension, family history, dyslipidemia, NYHA and presence atherosclerosis CT. Only the presence of diabetes showed differences between the two groups (p = 0.03). During the follow-up period, 55 events took place, and was only selected adverse clinical outcomes occurred after three months of follow-up at least. Three patients died of acute myocardial infarction; nonfatal myocardial occurred in five patients; unstable angina requiring hospitalization occurred in 15 patients; 32 patients underwent coronary revascularization with percutaneous coronary intervention performed in 27 patients, while the remaining five patients underwent coronary artery bypass grafting. Revascularization decision was based on the worsening of angina and/or presence of ischemia in noninvasive testing. Univariate analysis of clinical and MDCT characteristics to predict adverse clinical outcomes is exposed on Table 1. In the multivariate analysis were included the variables that were significant in the univariate analysis. The independent predictors of cardiac events obtained in the multivariate analysis are shown in Table 2. The presence of coronary plaques to the MDCT, dyspnea symptoms by NYHA functional class, smoking and diabetes mellitus were independent predicting factors of adverse clinical outcomes. Image 2 shows the different curves related to event-free survival in patients with and without plaques with MDCT. To determine whether the presence of hemodynamically significant coronary atherosclerosis, (< 50%) didn't mean to be associated with adverse cardiovascular events, a subanalysis of study patients taking significant atherosclerotic lesions was performed. In this new model, the presence of atherosclerosis demonstrated by MDCT in patients with no significant obstructive lesions remained as a predictor of adverse clinical outcomes (hazard ratio 3.21; 95% confidence interval 1.5 -7.1; p = 0.004).   Discussion The reference pattern for diagnosing CAD is angiography Conventional coronary (CA). Although the incidence of morbidity and mortality is low, the AC can cause serious complications, with overall risk of all major complications of 1.7%, with a mortality rate of 0.11% and a vascular complication rate of 0.43% 14. Multidetector computed tomography for coronary evaluation has rapidly emerged as an accurate diagnostic tool in CAD with high sensitivity values (range 94% to 99%), specificity (range 95% to 97%), positive predictive value (range 76% to 97%) and negative predictive value (ranging from 97% to 100%) 2-4, and the introduction of MDCT 64 columns detectors allowed a substantial improvement in the accuracy of método15-17. The high negative predictive value strongly suggests that MDCT could be helpful to discard CAD diagnosis. In our study, after an average 15 months of follow-up, only one patient with MDCT without evidence of coronary atherosclerosis had an adverse clinical outcome, given a negative predictive value of 98.2% for predicting adverse cardiac events. Gilard et al 7 showed a low incidence of cardiac events after the normal MDCT in patients with suspected CAD in a study with 141 patients. Pundziute and caols. 8 showed 100% absence of events in patients with no abnormality in MDCT, highlighting an excellent negative predictive value of the normal MDCT. Hadamitzky and cols. 9 demonstrated a significant impact in predicting cardiac events by an average period of time of 18 months of follow-up. Chow et al 18, in a large international multicenter registry showed that CAD significantly estimated by MDCT had incremental value over a fraction of the left ventricular ejection and clinical variables 18. These results confirm that MDCT is useful as a diagnostic tool in patients with suspected CAD and can, when the result is normal, suggest strongly dismiss this diagnosis. This finding is of significant clinical relevance, because these patients may indeed be safely reassured without additional testing. Other non-invasive tests also provide useful prognostic information for risk stratification. Myocardial scintigraphy showed an annual mortality or stroke rate of less than 1% annually19 when the study is normal. Stress echocardiography has an excellent negative predictive value for the occurrence of adverse events cardíacos20-22. In this study we support the idea that the presence of any board, regardless of the severity of the stenosis is able to predict adverse clinical outcomes. The MDCT directly identifies coronary plaques, while conventional images AC determine the contour of the lumen of the coronary artery and does not provide information on the vessel wall and plaque volume and may therefore underestimate the atherosclerotic lesion and possible vulnerable plaques which may lead to coronary aguda23 syndrome. Previous studies have shown that non-obstructive lesions may contribute to coronary events 24. Since the less obstructive plaques are more frequent than the severe obstructive plaques, as shown here, coronary occlusion and myocardial infarction may in fact be more often related to non obstructives injuries 25,26. In this study, we demonstrate that the presence of coronary atherosclerosis by MDCT, regardless of the degree of obstruction, was an independent predictor of future adverse cardiac events. Among the limitations of this study, we can mention the low event rate, as well as a wide range of different conditions associated with the indication for examination. Future studies should address the prognostic role of MDCT in more homogeneous populations. Moreover, the study population was small. Studies in larger cohorts (with longer follow-up) are clearly needed to confirm these results. Chow et al., In a large international multicenter registry showed that the severity of CAD estimated by MDCT had incremental value of left ventricular ejection fraction and variable clínicas18. MDCT results have the potential to influence the indication of revascularization decision, can change the outcome in this study. However, we consider as an adverse clinical outcome only those that occurred after three months of follow-up (mean 15 months, range 3-43 months). After this period, the CABG indication was based on clinical decision, as established by the guidelines. Nevertheless, the result of the MDCT may be a confounding factor, associating the revascularization outcome.   Conclusion The presence of atherosclerosis demonstrated by MDCT in patients with suspected CAD presented independent and incremental value to conventional risk factors (diabetes, smoking, and NYHA functional class) in the prediction of adverse clinical outcomes. MDCT may prove itself useful in the risk stratification of these patients. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   