 SUMMARY background: Although studies have demonstrated a high diagnostic accuracy of Ct Coronary Multidetectores (MDCT) in the detection of Coronary Artery Disease (cad), data on the prognostic value of this method are limited. OBJECTIVE: to Determine the value of MDCT in prediction of clinical outcomes, adverse in patients with suspected CAD. METHODS: we evaluated prospectively 355 consecutive patients (mean age 58 ± 12 years, 252 males) with suspected CAD between January 2008 and June 2010. DAC by MDCT was defined as the presence of plaque of atheroma observed in any artery, the coronary. The clinical outcomes adverse were defined as death, myocardial infarction, unstable angina or coronary artery bypass grafting. RESULTS: During a median follow-up of 15 months, there were 55 cardiac events. In the multivariate analysis using the regression model of Cox, the functional class of the NYHA, diabetes, tobacco smoking and atherosclerosis on MDCT were predictors of clinical outcome adverse, and the presence of plaque on MDCT showed a strong association with clinical outcomes adverse, regardless of risk factors established for cad (hazard ratio 5,29; confidence interval of 95%, 2,4 - 11,8; p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: THE presence of atherosclerosis demonstrated by MDCT in patients with suspected DAC submitted value is independent and incremental to risk factors conventional in the prediction of clinical outcomes, adverse, and may prove useful in risk stratification of these patients. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0) key Words: Disease of the Coronary arteries; Computed Tomography; Prognosis. Introduction Coronary Artery Disease (cad) represents an important cause of mortality and morbidity in the world, with important impact socioeconômico1. The Tomography Coronary Multidetectores (MDCT) represents important method in the evaluation of the coronary arteries with high accuracy in the diagnosis of arterial disease coronariana2-5. However, although previous studies have demonstrated its role in the prediction of events adversos6-12, its validation has not yet been fully determined. The aim of this study was to evaluate the value of MDCT in prediction of clinical outcomes, adverse in patients with suspected CAD. Methods From January 2008 to December 2010, have been allocated in a cohort with collecting prospective data, consecutive patients suspected for cad undergoing MDCT. The patients were referred for a variety of indications, including the evaluation of symptoms, signs of heart disease (resting ECG is abnormal or stress test positive), or asymptomatic patients with the presence of two or more risk factors for cad. The exclusion criteria were: DAC known, acute coronary syndrome, cardiac arrhythmia, allergy to iodinated contrast and renal failure. Informed consent was obtained from all patients. On admission, a collection of standardized data on the presence of risk factors heart was filled by each individual. Systemic arterial hypertension was defined as a documented history of high blood pressure or treatment with antihypertensive medications. The presence of diabetes mellitus was defined by diagnosis previous diabetes and/or use of insulin or oral hypoglycemics. Dyslipidemia was defined as prior history of dyslipidemia or current treatment with medications lipid-lowering. It was considered as a smoking habit current smoking or cessation of smoking within three months of the examination. For the definition of the functional class, we used the classification based on New York Heart Association (NYHA). Family history of coronary heart disease was defined as the presence of chd in first-degree relatives under the age of 55 (male) or 65 (female) years of age. Was used ct scanner, 64 channels (Aquilion, Toshiba Medical Company, Japan), and images of the entire heart were acquired in apnea of 6 to 8 s, with venous infusion of 85 to 90 mL of iodinated contrast (Iopamiron 350), in infusion pump flow rate of 5 mL/s. ROI, automatic detection of the contrast was positioned in the descending aorta (150 HU), starting with the acquisition of images. Patients with HR greater than 70 bpm and no contraindications received 15 mg of metoprolol intravenous. Images were reconstructed with parting thickness of 0.3 mm at intervals of 0.4 mm, with gating retrospective. All data were analyzed by physicians experienced in the method, using reformatting multiplanar reconstruction and 3-D technology by "volume rendering" of The coronary arteries were divided into 17 segmentos13. The segments were evaluated for the presence of any atherosclerotic plaque, defined as structures > 1 mm2 within and/or adjacent to the lumen of the artery coronary. After that, it was determined whether the lesion was obstructive or not, using a threshold of 50% luminal narrowing. The percentage of obstruction of the lumen of the artery coronary was based on a comparison of the diameter of luminal obstruction compared to the diameter luminal immediately proximal to the plaque. Patients without calcium in the artery coronary or coronary plaques on MSCT were considered normal, being a MDCT abnormal defined as presence of any plaque coronary. The clinical outcomes adverse of the patients were obtained by telephone interview, being classified as the occurrence of: 1) death cardiac in origin; 2) myocardial infarction; 3) unstable angina associated with hospitalization; or 4) coronary artery bypass grafting. Statistical analysis The demographic characteristics and the clinical population studied were expressed as numbers and percentages for categorical variables and as mean and standard deviation for continuous variables compared with chi-square test for categorical variables and by Student's t-test for continuous variables. To satisfy the assumption of independence of the events, the recurrence of cardiac events in a participant was not included in the analysis. The regression model of Cox was used to assess the value of clinical variables and the presence of plaques on MDCT in prediction of cardiac events. Initially, the univariate analysis of the clinical characteristics and variables by MDCT was performed to identify predictors of potential. Hazard ratio was calculated with confidence interval of 95% as an estimate of the risk associated with a private variable. Subsequently, multivariate analysis was performed, including all variables selected in the univariate analysis. The incremental value of each variable in the model was tested using the likelihood-ratio, obtaining the chi-square and comparing to the previous model. The statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software (version 18.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois) and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results During the study period, were selected initially 405 patients; 21 were excluded because the indication of evaluation of post-myocardial revascularization surgery and 29, for the evaluation of post-angioplasty. In total, 355 consecutive patients were included in the study, being 71,8% men, mean age 58.4 ± 12,4 years. The general characteristics of the patients are summarized in table 1. The indications for the examinations of MDCT were as follows: evaluation of chest pain in 131 patients (32,4%); positive result of test of stress (133 patients [33%]); asymptomatic patients with two or more risk factors (110 patients [27,2%]); and other causes in 30 patients (7,4%). The presence of coronary plaques fig. 1a) were found in 55,8% of the patients and by 28.5% in the right coronary artery, 23,7% in the artery circunflexa, and 40.6% of the artery descending earlier. Coronary arteries with lesions of greater than 50% (fig. 1b) were found in 7.7% in the right coronary artery, 5.4% in the artery circunflexa, and 9.4% in the artery and the descending anterior left. The average follow up was 15 months (range 3-43 months), has been carried out in 321 patients (90,4%). To determine if the loss in the follow-up could represent an influence on the results, it was performed a comparative analysis between the groups with and without follow-up, demonstrating difference in respect to age, sex, smoking, hypertension, family history, hyperlipidemia, NYHA, and the presence of atherosclerosis in the TC. Only the presence of diabetes showed the difference between the two groups (p = 0.03). During the follow-up period, 55 events occurred, having been selected only clinical outcomes, adverse that occurred after three months of follow-up at a minimum. Three patients died of acute myocardial infarction; non-fatal myocardial infarction occurred in five patients; unstable angina requiring hospitalization occurred in 15 patients; 32 patients underwent coronary revascularization, with percutaneous coronary intervention performed in 27 patients, while the remaining five patients were submitted to coronary artery bypass grafting. The decision for revascularization was based on worsening angina and/or presence of ischemia on non-invasive tests. The univariate analysis of the clinical characteristics and MDCT to predict clinical outcomes and adverse is shown on table 1. Were included in the multivariate analysis the variables that were significant in the univariate analysis. The independent predictors of cardiac events obtained in the multivariate analysis are shown in table 2. The presence of coronary plaques on MDCT, symptoms of dyspnoea by the functional class of the NYHA, smoking and diabetes mellitus were independent predictors of clinical outcomes adverse. Figure 2 shows the different curves related to event-free survival in patients with and without plates to the MDCT. To determine whether the presence of coronary atherosclerosis hemodynamically non-significant (<50%) could be related with the occurrence of cardiovascular events adverse, was held a subanálise withdrawing from the study patients with atherosclerotic lesions significant. In this new model, the presence of atherosclerosis demonstrated by MDCT in patients with obstructive lesions are not significant, remained as a predictor of clinical outcomes adverse (hazard ratio 3,21; 95% confidence interval 1,5 -7,1; p = 0.004). Discussion The test to reference standard for diagnosis for cad is Coronary Angiography conventional (AC). Although the incidence of morbidity and mortality is low, the AC may cause serious complications, with a total risk of all major complications was 1.7%, with a mortality of 0.11% and a complication rate vascular 0.43%14. The computed tomography multidetectores for evaluation of coronary has rapidly emerged as a tool for accurate diagnosis in the DAC, with high values of sensitivity (range of 94% to 99%), specificity (range of 95% to 97%), positive predictive value (range from 76% to 97%) and negative predictive value (ranging from 97% to 100%)2-4, and the introduction of MDCT 64 columns of detectors allowed for a substantial improvement in the accuracy of the método15-17. The high negative predictive value suggests strongly that the MDCT could be useful to rule out the diagnosis of CAD. In our study, after an average 15 months of follow-up, only one patient with MDCT without evidence of coronary atherosclerosis presented clinical outcome adverse, given a negative predictive value of 98.2% for predicting cardiac events adverse. Gilard and colleagues.7 showed a low incidence of cardiac events after MDCT was normal in patients with suspicion of chd in a study with 141 patients. Pundziute and colleagues.8 showed a 100% absence of events in patients without any abnormalities on MSCT, highlighting an excellent negative predictive value of MDCT normal. Hadamitzky and cols.9 have demonstrated a significant impact in the prediction of cardiac events for an average period of 18 months of follow-up. Chow and colleagues.18, in a record multicenter large international, demonstrated that DAC-significant estimated by MDCT had incremental value over left ventricular ejection fraction and variables clínicas18. These results confirm that MDCT is useful as a diagnostic tool in patients with cad is suspected, and may, when the result is normal, suggest strongly discard this diagnosis. This finding is of clinical relevance important, because these patients may in fact be safely reassured without the need for additional testing. Other non-invasive tests also provide information prognostic useful in risk stratification. The myocardial scintigraphy showed an annual mortality or the rate of infarction is less than 1% to the ano19 when the study is normal. The stress echocardiography has an excellent negative predictive value for the occurrence of adverse events cardíacos20-22. In this study, we support the idea that the presence of any card, regardless of the severity of the stenosis, is able to predict clinical outcomes and adverse. The MDCT direct identification of coronary plaques, whereas the conventional imaging of the CA determine the contour of the lumen of the coronary vessels, not providing information about the wall of the vessel and the volume of the board, and may, therefore, underestimate the injury to atherosclerotic and possible vulnerable plaques that may lead to coronary syndrome aguda23. Earlier studies have shown that the lesions are not obstructive can contribute to events coronarianos24. By reason of the plates less obstructive being more common than plates obstructive severe, as shown here, occlusion, coronary, and myocardial infarction may, in fact, be more often related to injuries not obstrutivas25,26. In the present study, we demonstrate that the presence of coronary atherosclerosis by MDCT, regardless of the degree of obstruction was an independent predictor of future cardiac events adverse. Among the limitations of this study, we can cite the low rate of events, as well as a wide spectrum of different conditions associated with the indication of the examination. Future studies should address the role prognosis of MDCT in a population more homogeneous. In addition, the study population was small. Studies carried out in cohorts larger (with longer follow-up) are clearly needed to confirm these results. Chow and cols., in a large registry multicenter international, have shown that the severity of CAD estimated by MDCT had incremental value over left ventricular ejection fraction and variables clínicas18. The results of MDCT have the potential to influence the decision of indication for revascularization, which may change the outcome in this study. However, we consider the clinical outcome adverse only those that occurred after three months of follow-up (average 15 months, ranging from 3 to 43 months). After this period, the indication for cabg was based on clinical decision-making, according to the established guidelines. Despite this, the result of the MDCT may be a factor of confusion, by associating to the outcome of revascularization. Conclusion The presence of atherosclerosis demonstrated by MDCT in patients with suspected DAC submitted value is independent and incremental to risk factors conventional (diabetes, smoking, and functional class by NYHA) in the prediction of outcomes clinical adverse. The MDCT may prove useful in risk stratification of these patients. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 