ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: The Three-dimensional echocardiography on real time (3D Echo) and the ultrafast computed tomography (CT) are two new methods of analysis of the ejection fraction and of the LV volumes. OBJECTIVE: To compare the measurements of LVEF and LV volumes measured by 3D Echo and ultrafast CT. METHODS: 39 consecutive patients (27 men, mean age 57 ± 12 years) were studied by ECO 3D and by the ultra-fast 64-cut CT. Were analyzed: LVEF and LV volumes. Statistical analysis: Correlation coefficient (r: Pearson) test Bland & Altman, linear regression test, 95% CI p < 0.05. RESULTS: ECO 3D Measurements: LVEF varied from 56.1 to 78.6 (65.5 ± 5.58)%; end-diastolic volume ranged from 49.6 to 178.2 (87 ± 27.8) ml; end-systolic volume ranged from 11.4 to 78 (33.1 ± 13.6) ml. CT Measures: the LVEF ranged 53-86 (67.8 ± 7.78)%; the end-diastolic volume ranged 51-186 (106.5 ± 30.3) ml; the end-systolic volume ranged from 7 to 72 (35.5 ± 13.4) ml. Correlations between ECO and 3D CT were FEVE (r: 0.7888, p < 0.0001, 95% CI 0.6301 to 0.8843); end - diastolic volume (r: 0.7695, p < 0.0001, 95% CI 0.5995 to 0.8730); end - systolic volume (r: 0.8119, p < 0.0001, 95% CI from 0.6673 to 0.8975). CONCLUSION: In this series, there was a good correlation between LVEF measurements and between ventricular volumes assessed by ECO3D and by ultrafast CT 64 slices. Keywords: Three-dimensional echocardiography, emission computed tomography, heart/anatomy physiology, stroke volume.     Introduction The echocardiography has been characterized as a diagnostic method of choice for the morphofunctional study of the cardiac structures because of its anatomical correspondence, the ease of implementation, low cost, absence of ionizing radiation and good reproducibility. However, the bidimensional echocardiography technique currently used in most structural heart analysis has limitations for the observation of cardiac anatomy. This follows from the geometric inferences assumed for calculating the diameters and cardiac volumes from a limited number of observation plans 1-7. Greater anatomical divergence situations occur in the event of dilation of the cardiac chambers. Thus, the Three-Dimensional echocardiography (3D Echo) was developed, enabling the structural visualization from multiple simultaneous observation planes, which leads to greater proximity to the anatomical reality. The validation of the analysis of volumes and the ejection fraction of the left ventricular with 3D Eco employment has been demonstrated in previous studies with the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 8-11. MRI is, however, limitations with respect to patients with mechanical prostheses, pacemakers, metallic devices, obese or who have difficulties to remain small physical space. In this context, another method of imaging investigation, the ultrafast computed tomography of 64 cuts (CT), has also been used for cardiac structural analysis, especially for the observation of the coronary anatomy. A CT scan of 64 cuts presents the possibility of higher anatomical analysis by echocardiography, while echocardiography allows temporal identification superior to CT scan. Few studies have compared the analysis of ejection fraction and left ventricular volumes assessed by echocardiography and by tomografia11-14. Thus, the aim of this study was to compare the measurements of ejection fraction and left ventricular volumes assessed by the 3D Echo and the ultrafast CT of 64 cuts.   Method Population From October 2006 to July 2007 were studied prospectively and consecutively 39 patients, 17 subjects with a history of coronary artery disease and 21 subjects without a history of coronary artery disease. The subjects underwent to a echocardiographic investigation and tomographic the echocardiography at the laboratory and computed tomography sector of the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo. The average age of patients was 57 ± 12 years, 27 male. All patients had regular heart rhythm (sinus rhythm). The patients were previously evaluated clinically by the same investigator (BTJ). The study was approved by the Committee of Ethics in Research, Institute of Education and Research, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, SP. The individuals were subjected to two-dimensional echocardiographic analysis, three-dimensional tomographic analysis. Echocardiography The two-dimensional echocardiographic examinations were performed according to the American Society of Echocardiography, in commercially available equipment (Philips IE33, Andover, MA, USA) equipped with transducer of 2-5 MHz, and X3 matrix transducer for the acquisition of three-dimensional images. The echocardiographic parameters were studied: I) Two-dimensional echocardiography: 1) Volume of the left ventricle diastolic end (LVFDV); 2) Volume of the left ventricle systolic end (LVFSV); 3) Ejection fraction of the left ventricle (Simpson method). II) Three-dimensional echocardiography: 1) Final diastolic volume of the left ventricle (FDVLV); 2) Final systolic volume of the left ventricle (FSVLV); 3) Ejection fraction of the left ventricle (EFLV). A model of 17 ventricular segments was used for the analysis of left ventricular contractility (figure 1). The acquisition of three-dimensional images was held in two-dimensional echocardiographic examination sequence. The images were obtained with the same echocardiographic equipment, with the use of matrix transducer with the patient in expiratory apnea, and the image was coupled to the electrocardiographic recording. The images were stored on the hard disk of the echocardiography equipment and analyzed "off-line" in specific software of the equipment (Q Lab, version 5.0, Philips, Andover, MA, USA). Analyses were performed by two independent observers. Patients who did not have a bidimensional or three-dimensional echocardiographic images considered as adequate technical quality for analysis of the parameters or showed great irregularity of the heart rhythm were not included in this study. Thus, four patients were not included in the study, two with images were considered inadequate for left ventricular analysis, two in irregularity due to a severe heart rhythm. Computed Tomography Examinations of cardiac computed tomography were performed in a Toshiba multidetector CT scanner, with 64 detector rows. Non-ionic iodinated contrast have been used (Henetix -350 mg/ml) injected by peripheral vein with 5 ml/s speed, followed by infusing 50 ml of saline. The images were acquired by an electrocardiographic gating, requiring 8-10 apnea the 2nd period. The image parameters included rotation time "gantry" of 0.4s, voltage 120kV tube, 400 mA and collimation of 64 x 0.5 mm. For analysis of ventricular function, the images were reconstructed with 1 mm thickness in ten phases of the cardiac cycle. It was used intravenous beta-blocker (metoprolol 5 mg, maximum dose of 20 mg) in patients with heart rate above 65 bpm. The analysis of ejection fraction and ventricular volumes was performed "off-line" workstation. The quantitative analysis of ventricular function was done by semi-automated method (area-length method) by two observers using the short axis of the heart, apical model for cardiac segments 17 (Figures 2 and 3). Statistics Descriptive analysis were performed, of the correlation and comparison methods. The descriptive analysis of continuous variables was made by observing the minimum and maximum values, and, the mean calculation and standard deviation. The correlation analysis was performed using Pearson's correlation method (r), 95% of confidence interval. The comparison between methods was made by employing the Bland & Altman Test. It was also employed the linear regression test between the parameters measured with bidimensional and three-dimensional echocardiography. The measurements were performed by two independent observers. P values < 0.05 were considered significant. The data was processed with a statistical analysis system MedCalc, Mariakerke, Belgium.   Results Descriptive analysis of the echocardiographic and tomographic characteristics (left ventricular volumes and ejection fraction) of the study population is shown in Table 1. The patients had ventricular ejection fraction within normal limits, as well as ventricular volumes (means).     The correlation analysis (Pearson: r) and the linear regression equation for comparing the measurements of volume and left ventricular ejection fraction measured by three-dimensional echocardiography and computed tomography are shown in Table 2. A good correlation (r) for the measurement of volumes and ejection fraction with two different methods was observed. The agreement analysis (Bland test & Altman) and linear regression equations for ejection fraction measurements and left ventricular volumes assessed by three-dimensional echocardiography and computed tomography are shown in Figures 1, 2 and 3. A good concordance (r) between the echocardiographic measurements of 3D EFLV and 2D LEFV (r): 0.8472, p < 0.0001, CI: 0.8254 to 0.9141 was observed. The intra-observer agreement for the three-dimensional echocardiographic analysis of the left ventricular ejection fraction was of 0.8634, IC 95% (from 0.7083 to 0.9436). The interobserver concordance coefficient for three-dimensional echocardiographic analysis of left ventricular ejection fraction was 0.8051, CI (0.5976 to 0.9221). The intra-observer agreement for the tomographic analysis of left ventricular ejection fraction was 0.8727, IC 95% (from 0.7437 to 0.9579). The inter observer concordance coefficient for tomographic analysis of left ventricular ejection fraction was 0.8347, CI (0.6176 to 0.9291). Concordance (r) between the measurements of 2D FEVE and FEVE measured with computed tomography was (r): 0.6172, p < 0.0001, CI: 0.5654 to 0.8171.   Discussion The determination of the ventricular systolic function and the measurement of ventricular volumes can be performed with the use of different non-invasive techniques of image analysis. Each technique has specific characteristics, resulting on advantages and limitations of their employment. Currently, two-dimensional echocardiography is the most widely used method for the anatomical and functional cardiac analysis. It allows the anatomical assessment of the various cardiac structures, it allows the analysis of cardiac diastole with the use of different forms of Doppler echocardiography, and may be performed at the bedside in intensive care and emergency room. It presents, however, limitations due to suboptimal echocardiographic imaging in obese patients and in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It also presents reasonable reliance on interpretation of the study's director and limitation by employing small number of anatomical planes for cardiac analysis. The use of three-dimensional echocardiography increases the possibility of echocardiographic heart observation from the structural observation, taking into account multiple spatial planes of analysis. Structural analysis is performed based on identification of new plans without the necessity of using geometric extrapolations for the analysis of complex anatomical shapes (eg, right ventricular) which, once in a while, limited themselves to the particular math formulation. However, the three-dimensional echocardiography requires needs echocardiography training, it requires stability of the heart rate for its better analysis and also depends on the initial image quality for its best result. MRI is now considered as a reference for the anatomical analysis of most cardiac anatomical diseases. However, it has limitations in respect to its cost, in patients with metallic devices; Extensive training is required and it is not available in most hospitals around the country. The ultrafast computed tomography of 64 cuts is a faster realization technique than nuclear magnetic resonance, it allows analysis in patients with metallic devices and also allows the joint observation of ventricular function of ventricular volumes and coronary circulation. It is, however, a higher cost technique when compared to echocardiographic modalities. In this study, we observed a good correlation analysis of the ejection fraction, of the final diastolic volume and of the final systolic volume of the left ventricle measured by three-dimensional echocardiography and computed tomography of 64 cuts (r: 0.7888, r: 0.7695 r: 0.8119, p < 0.0001, respectively). This finding is consistent with a previous study in which it was observed a good correlation (r > 0.85) between the volumetric and functional analysis of the left ventricle measured with the use of three-dimensional echocardiography and Computed tomography11. In the analysis of the ejection fraction measurements made with bidimensional echocardiography and computed tomography of 64 slices we observed lower concordance between the methods (r: 0.6172, p < 0.0001), better than the observed in a study in patients with heart transplant (r: 0.49) 13, and similar (r: 0.59) to a previous study in patients with suspected coronary artery disease where it was used a 16 slices tomograph 12. The agreement for the ejection fraction measurements were taken at the three-dimensional and the bidimensional echocardiography was good (r: 0.8472, p < 0.0001). This finding is justified by the observation of the left ventricular geometry and ventricular function preserved in the number of individuals studied. It was also observed a good reproducibility of the measurement of ejection fraction by three-dimensional echocardiography (interobserver concordance coefficient of 0.8051) and computed tomography (interobserver concordance coefficient of 0.8347). The results of this study show that it was observed a good agreement for the morpho-functional analysis of the left ventricle between two methods of noninvasive analysis with different possibilities of temporal and spatial observation. The best time observation of three-dimensional echocardiography allows better identification of functional cardiac events. While the better anatomical definition provided by the tomographic analysis allows for greater structural detail. It is important, in the future, a choice of non-invasive cardiac investigation modality that combines low cost, high reproducibility, diagnostic accuracy and availability of using the low-income population. Study limitations In this study, a comparative analysis of the volumes and the ejection fraction of the left ventricle, employing three-dimensional echocardiography and ultrafast computed tomography of 64 cuts, was restricted to the number of individuals with preserved ventricular function and volumes (average) within the normal limits. There is a need in comparing patients with ventricular dilation, and contractile dysfunction and also in clinical situations in which there is the presence of irregular heart rhythm.   Conclusion In this series, there was a good correlation between the measurements of ejection fraction and between left ventricular volumes assessed by three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography in real time and with ultrafast computed tomography of 64 cuts. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare there is no relevant conflict of interests. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources.   