 SUMMARY background: THE echocardiographic three-dimensional real-time (ECO-3D) and the computed tomography, ultra-fast (CT) are two new methods of analysis of ejection fraction and volumes of the VE. OBJECTIVE: to Compare the measurements of LVEF and volumes of the VE measured by the ECO-3D and the CT ultra-fast. METHODS: we studied by ECO-3D and the CT ultra-fast 64-cortes, 39 consecutive patients (27 men, mean age of 57±12 years). Were analyzed: LVEF and volumes of the VE. Statistical analysis: coefficient of correlation (r: Pearson), the Bland & Altman plots, linear regression test, 95 % CI, p<0.05. RESULTS: Measures ECHO 3D: the LVEF ranged from 56,1 to 78,6 (65,5±5,58)%; final diastolic volume ranged from of 49.6 the 178,2 (87±27,8)ml; final systolic volume ranged from 11.4 to 78 (33,1±13,6)ml. Measures of CT: LVEF ranged from 53 to 86 (67,8±7,78)%; final diastolic volume ranged from 51 to 186 (106,5±30,3) ml; final systolic volume ranged from 7 to 72 (35,5±13,4)ml. The correlations between ECO-3D and the CT were: LVEF (r: 0,7888, p<0.0001, 95% CI 0,6301 the 0,8843); final diastolic volume (r: 0,7695, p<0.0001, 95% CI 0,5995 the 0,8730); final systolic volume (r: 0,8119, p<0.0001, 95% CI 0,6673 the 0,8975). CONCLUSION: in This series, it was observed good correlation between the measurements of LVEF and between the ventricular volumes as measured by the ECO3D and by CT ultra-fast 64 cuts. Key words: Echocardiography, three-dimensional, emission computed tomography, heart/anatomy, physiology, stroke volume. Introduction echocardiography has been characterized for be the diagnostic method of choice for the study morfofuncional of the cardiac structures on the basis of their correspondence to the anatomical, ease of implementation, low cost, absence of ionizing radiation and good reproducibility. However, the echocardiography two-dimensional, the technique currently most widely used in the analysis structural heart, has limitations for the observation of the anatomy of the heart. This stems from the inferences geometry assumed for the calculation of the diameters and volumes of heart from the limited number of plans observação1-7. Situations of greater divergence anatomical occur in the event of dilation of the heart chambers. In this way, was developed the three-dimensional images (Eco-3D), allowing the visualization of structural data from multiple plans a simultaneous observation, which leads to a greater proximity with the reality of anatomical. The validation of the analysis of the volumes and the ejection fraction of the left ventricle with the use of the Echo 3D has been demonstrated in previous studies with the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)8-11. The RM has, however, limitations with respect to patients with mechanical prostheses, pacemakers, metal devices, are obese or who have difficulties to stay in small physical spaces. In this context, another research method per image, the computed tomography, ultra-fast 64-cuts (TC), has also been employed for the structural analysis heart, especially for observation of the coronary anatomy. The TC 64 cuts presents the possibility of anatomical analysis superior to echocardiography, while the echocardiographic analysis allows identification superior temporal to the study ct. Few studies in the literature have compared the analysis of ejection fraction and volumes of the left ventricle as measured by echocardiography and by tomografia11-14. In this way, the aim of this study was to compare the measures of ejection fraction and volumes of the left ventricle as measured by the ECO 3D and CT, ultra-fast 64 cuts. Method the Population for The period October 2006 to July 2007 were studied prospectively and consecutive 39 patients, 17 subjects with a past history of coronary artery disease and 21 subjects with no prior history of coronary artery disease. The individuals were submitted to the research echocardiographic and tomographic in the laboratory of echocardiography and in the sector of computed tomography at Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo. The average age of the patients was 57±12 years, 27 male. All patients had heart rhythm regular (sinus rhythm). Patients were previously assessed clinically by the same investigator (BTJ). The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee, Institute of Education and Research, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, SP, brazil. The individuals were subjected to echocardiographic analysis two-dimensional, three-dimensional, and the analysis of tomographic. Echocardiographic examinations echocardiographic two-dimensional were carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the American Society of Echocardiography, in equipment commercially available (Philips IE33, Andover, MA, USA), equipped with transducer of 2-5 MHZ, and the transducer dot matrix X3 for the acquisition of three-dimensional images. The parameters echocardiographic studied were: I) Echocardiography two-dimensional: 1) final diastolic Volume of the left ventricle (LVFDV); 2) Volume of the left ventricle final systolic (LVFSV); 3) ejection Fraction of the left ventricle (method Simpson). (II) Echocardiography in three-dimensional: 1) final diastolic Volume of the left ventricle (LVFDV); 2) Volume of the left ventricle final systolic (LVFSV); 3) ejection Fraction of the left ventricle (LVEF). Was used on a model of 17 segments ventricular for the analysis of contractility left ventricular (figure1). The acquisition of three-dimensional images was performed in the sequence of the examination ecocardiográfico two-dimensional. The images were obtained with the same equipment ecocardiográfico, with the use of transducer matrix, being the patient in apnea, expiratory, having been the image attached to electrocardiographic recordings. The images were stored on the hard disk of the device ecocardiográfico and analyzed "off-line" in the specific software of the equipment (Q Lab, version 5.0, Philips, Andover, MA, USA). The analyses were performed by two independent observers. The patients who did not have the image echocardiographic two-dimensional or three-dimensional, considered as a technical quality adequate for the analysis of the parameters studied, or that have presented great irregularity of the heart rhythm were not included in this study. In this way, were not included in the study four patients, two with image considered as not suitable for the analysis left ventricular, two on the grounds of irregularity marked heart rate. Computed tomography scans computed tomography heart were performed in the ct scanner with multidetectores Toshiba, with 64 rows of detectors. Was used iodinated contrast non-ionic (Henetix -350 mg/ml) injected by peripheral vein with a speed of 5 ml/s, followed by infusion of 50 ml of saline solution. The images were acquired with coupling eletrocardiográfico, being necessary period of apnea for 8-10 seconds. The image parameters included a rotation time of the "gantry" of 0.4 s, a tube voltage of 120kV, 400 mA, and collimation of 64 x 0.5 mm. For analysis of ventricular function, images were reconstructed with 1 mm of thickness in ten phases of the cardiac cycle. Was used beta-blockers intravenous (metoprolol 5 mg, maximum dose 20 mg) in patients with heart rate above 65 bpm. The analysis of ejection fraction and ventricular volumes was performed "off-line" on the workstation. The analysis of ventricular function quantitative was done by the method semi-automated method (area-length) by two observers, using the short axis of the heart, the projection cone for the model of 17 segments heart (figures 2 and 3). Statistical analysis Was carried out descriptive, correlation and comparison between methods. The descriptive analysis of continuous variables was made by the observation of minimum and maximum values, and the calculation of averages and standard deviations. The correlation analysis was made by the method of Pearson's correlation (r), 95% confidence interval. The comparison between methods was carried out with the employment of the Bland & Altman plot. It was also performed the test of the linear regression between the parameters measured with echocardiography two-dimensional and three-dimensional. The measurements were performed by two independent observers. P-values<0.05 were considered significant. The data were processed with the system of statistical analysis MedCalc, Mariakerke, Belgium. Results The descriptive analysis of the characteristics ecocardiográficas and tomographic (volumes and ejection fraction of the left ventricle) of the studied population is shown in table 1. The patients presented ventricular ejection fraction within normal limits, as well as ventricular volumes (averages). The analysis of correlation (Pearson:r) and the linear regression equation for the comparison between the measures of volumes and ejection fraction of left ventricle measured with the three-dimensional images and computerized tomography, are demonstrated in table 2. Was observed good correlation (r) for the measurement of volumes and ejection fraction with two different methods. The agreement analysis (Bland & Altman) and the equations of linear regression for the measures of ejection fraction and volumes of the left ventricle measured with the three-dimensional images and computerized tomography, are demonstrated in the graphs 1, 2 and 3. Was observed good concordance (r) between the measures ecocardiográficas LVEF and 3D LVEF by 2D (r): 0,8472, p<0.0001, CI: 0,8254 the 0,9141. The coefficient of agreement for intra-observer for the echocardiographic analysis three-dimensional ejection fraction of the left ventricle was 0,8634, 95% CI (0,7083 the 0,9436). The coefficient of agreement for interobserver for the echocardiographic analysis three-dimensional ejection fraction of the left ventricle was 0,8051, IC (0,5976 the 0,9221). The coefficient of agreement for intra-observer for the analysis of tomographic ejection fraction of the left ventricle was 0,8727, 95% CI (0,7437 the 0,9579). The coefficient of agreement for interobserver for the analysis of tomographic ejection fraction of the left ventricle was 0,8347, IC (0,6176 the 0,9291). The correlation (r) between the measures of LVEF and 2D LVEF measured with computed tomography was (r): 0,6172, p<0.0001, CI: 0,5654 the 0,8171. Discussion The determination of the systolic function ventricular and measurement of ventricular volumes can be performed with the employment of different techniques non-invasive analysis by the image. Each technique has a specific characteristic, causing advantages and limitations of their employment. Currently echocardiography two-dimensional is the method most widely used for the analysis of anatomical and functional cardiac. It allows for the assessment of anatomical of the various cardiac structures, allows the analysis of the diastole heart with the employment of different modalities of echocardiography with Doppler may also be performed at the bedside in the intensive care and emergency. It presents, however, limitations due to image echocardiographic sub-optimal in obese patients and in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. It also presents a reasonable dependency of the interpretation of the director of the study and limitation by the employment of a small number of anatomical planes for the analysis of the heart. The employment of three-dimensional images enhances the possibility of observation cardiac echocardiographic from the observation of the structural, taking into account multiple plans of spatial analysis. The structural analysis is carried out from new plans of identification, without the need of the employment of extrapolation of the geometric for the analysis of anatomic forms complex (example: right ventricle), and that it is not always limited to the mathematical formulation specific. However, the three-dimensional images requires training ecocardiográfico specific, requires stability of the heart rate to your better analysis and also depends on the quality of the initial image for the best result. Magnetic resonance imaging is considered today as a reference for the anatomical analysis of most of the diseases anatomical heart. However, it presents limitations with respect to their cost, in patients with metallic devices; it requires extensive specific training and is not available in most hospitals of the country. The computed tomography, ultra-fast 64-cortes is a technique of performance faster than the nuclear magnetic resonance, enables the analysis in patients with metallic devices, and also enables joint observation of ventricular function, ventricular volumes and circulation coronary. It is, however, technique of the higher cost when compared to the modalities ecocardiográficas. In this study, we observed good correlation of the analysis of ejection fraction, diastolic volume the end and the final systolic volume of the left ventricle measured with the three-dimensional images and computerized tomography of the 64 cuts (r: 0,7888, r: 0,7695, r: 0,8119, p<0.0001, respectively). This finding is consistent with a previous study in which was observed a good correlation (r>0,85) between the volumetric analysis and functional of the left ventricle measured with the employment of three-dimensional images and tomography computadorizada11. For the analysis of the measures of ejection fraction measured with echocardiography two-dimensional and computed tomography 64 cuts we observe agreement less between the methods (r: 0,6172, p<0.0001), better of that observed in a study in transplanted heart (r: 0,49)13 and similar (r:0,59) to the previous study in patients with suspected coronary artery disease in which it was used ct scanner 16 cortes12. The correlation for the measurements of ejection fraction measured with echocardiography three-dimensional and two-dimensional was good (r: 0,8472, p<0.0001). This finding is justified by the observation of left ventricular function and geometry of ventricular preserved in the series of individuals studied. It was also observed a good reproducibility of the measurement of ejection fraction with echocardiography three-dimensional (coefficient of agreement for interobserver of 0,8051) and computed tomography (coefficient of agreement for interobserver of 0,8347). The results of this study show that it was observed a good agreement for the analysis morfofuncional of the left ventricle between the two methods of analysis non-invasive with different possibilities of observation spatial and temporal. The best observation over time of three-dimensional images allows for better identification of the events in a functional heart. While the best definition of anatomical afforded by the analysis ct scan provides the most detailed structural. It is important, in the future, the choice of modality of investigation in cardiac non-invasive that combines low costs, great reproducibility, diagnostic accuracy and availability of use the low-income population. Limitation of the study in This study, the comparative analysis of volumes and ejection fraction of the left ventricle using echocardiography and three-dimensional computed tomography ultra-fast 64 cuts has been restricted to the number of individuals with ventricular function preserved, and volumes (the average) within the limits of normality. There is the need for the comparison in patients with dysfunction of the contraction and dilatation ventricular, and also within clinical situations in which there is the presence of irregularity of the heart rhythm. Conclusion in This series, it was observed good correlation between the measurements of the ejection fraction and between the volumes of the left ventricle as measured by echocardiography transthoracic three-dimensional real time and by computerized tomography and ultra-fast 64 cuts. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. 