ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Coronary angiography by multiple detectors (Angio CT) has shown good accuracy for the detection of coronary stenosis. Although this technique is promising for evaluation of CAD, its correlation with the functional manifestation of the disease is not well established. To evaluate the presence of CAD and the degree of coronary obstruction assessed by Angio CT are associated with changes in the examination scintigraphy Myocardial Perfusion (CPM). METHODS: A retrospective observational study, which included 99 consecutive patients with known or suspected CAD. There were tests of CPM and Angio CT. We are comparing the presence of perfusion defects by CPM in the presence of CAD and degree of luminal obstruction by CT angiography. It was used for statistical analysis the Student t test, ANOVA, chi-square test (or Fisher's exact test for n < 5). Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed and the significance criterion was the level of 5%. RESULTS: Mean age was 62 Â ± 11.4 years, 46 (71.7%) men. The analysis of variables was performed per patient (n = 99) and territory of coronary irrigation (n = 297). Of the 67 territories that had significant CAD by CT Angio, 44.8% had CPM changed. Considering the degree of stenosis, CPM changed was present in 18.7% of the territories with no significant stenosis, 45.28% of the territories with moderate stenosis and 42.8% of the territories with serious injuries. CONCLUSIONS: Angio CT is a good method for exclusion of CAD. However, its use for evaluation of stenosis severity and functional impact did not show good correlation. Keywords: Coronary Disease / diagnosis, CT, Heart / scintigraphy.     Introduction Despite major advances in understanding the pathophysiology of cardiovascular disease and the development of new diagnostic methods, Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) still remains in the XXI century as one of the leading causes of death in Brazil and mundo1,2. Although primary prevention is a priority for modern medicine, it is also developing additional diagnostic methods to assist in the early identification of CAD is necessary, since the rapid treatment is decisive for the outcome of the modification. Currently, coronary angiography is the gold standard method for the diagnosis of CAD; however, new noninvasive imaging methods, such as coronary angiography by multidetector CT scanner with (Angio CT), have been shown to be a reliable alternative for the diagnosis of this disease. Since this technique began to be used in clinical practice, there was a rapid improvement in the quality of the images obtained, allowing the expansion of the clinical application of this method whose accuracy, specificity and sensitivity to detect stenosis of the coronary arteries are already well established in literatura2-7 . However, it is important to note that, as well as invasive coronary angiography, this method identifies the anatomic stenosis of the coronary arteries, but does not allow functional evaluation of lesions. Among the methods that assess the functional impact of coronary obstructive lesions there is the scintigraphy Myocardial Perfusion (CPM), which has high accuracy for detecting myocardial ischemia, in addition to being a powerful tool to predict the risk of future coronary events, allowing stratify patients and guide to better conduct terapêutica8,9. Although Angio CT is a promising technique for evaluating CAD, its correlation with the functional manifestation of the disease is not well established and needs to be investigated. Thus, the aim of this study is to assess whether the existence of CAD and the degree of coronary obstruction assessed by Angio CT are associated with changes in the examination of CPM.   Methods We conducted a retrospective observational study in which consecutive patients were included, with suspected or confirmed CAD who underwent the Angio CT and CPM examinations from August 2006 to September 2009, with an interval less than 90 days between the two exams. The indication of the tests was the attending physician discretion, not being objective of the study to analyze the information. We used as sources of information the anamnesis sheets of Nuclear Medicine Service of the Pro-Cardiac Hospital and medical records of patients. patients with previous surgical revascularization history and those with incomplete medical record data were excluded. The project was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Pro-Cardiac Hospital in Rio de Janeiro, under the record 412. We studied the characteristics: gender, age, risk factors for CAD (hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, physical inactivity, diabetes, family history, obesity) and previous CAD (acute myocardial infarction, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, coronary angiography with larger obstructive lesions 50%).   The objective evaluated scintigraphic variables were: type of stress used; number of segments showing reversible perfusion defects (ischemia) and fixed defects (fibrosis) by qualitative analysis and quantification of these defects through software (QPS Cedars-Cinai and Emory Cardiac Toolbox); analysis of global and segmental contractility and ejection fraction by gated SPECT. The threading model used was 17 segmentos10. Scintigraphic examinations were classified as amended those with reversible or fixed perfusion defects. All CPM tests were performed at the Nuclear Medicine Service of the Pro-Cardiac Hospital in Rio de Janeiro in scintillation camera type Anger digital tomographic (Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography) of Siemens, E-Cam model of dual detector, collimator with low energy and high resolution. The results of scintigraphy were compared with the presence of coronary artery disease (being considered significant CAD the presence of luminal obstruction > 50%, and no significant CAD, < 50%), and degree of stenosis (not significant: < 50%; moderate : 50% -70%; severe: > 70%) assessed by CT Angio. The Angio CT scans were performed on LightSpeed ​​VCT 64 GE Healthcare unit. Patients were between 5 and 20 mg of intravenous metoprolol to control heart rate (HR), obtaining FC average of 70 bpm. For calcium score analysis was performed with conventional acquisition prospective trigger and 3 mm collimation. In the angiographic analysis was performed using helical and prospective or retrospective trigger acquisition, according to the HR and weight of the patient, 0.625 mm collimation injection and 80 ml of non-ionic iodinated contrast media with 5.0 ml / s flow. 20 were reconstructed cardiac phases and selected which showed the lowest degree of cardiac movement in the coronary arteries. For analysis to sources axial images, multiplanar reformatting, bends and three-dimensional reconstructions by volume rendering in ADW4.3 workstation (GE Healthcare). The analysis was done for each patient (n = 99) and territory of coronary irrigation (n = 297). For statistical analysis, SPSS version 17 was used. Continuous variables were presented in mean and standard deviation format. We used the Student t test for the averages of these variables, and ANOVA analysis of variance. For categorical variables, the chi-square test or Fisher's exact test for n < 5. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed and the significance criterion was the level of 5%.   Results The study included 99 patients with a mean age of 62 Â ± 11.4 years and 71.7% were male; 6% had a history of myocardial infarction; 18% had previous coronary angioplasty with stent implantation. Of the total sample, 47% reported chest pain as the main reason for the examination and myocardial perfusion scintigraphy was the first method in 66% of patients. The interval between the examinations was 12.4 Â ± 17.5 days. The type of stress used in scintigraphy was drug in 52 patients and physical in 47 patients. The other baseline characteristics of the study population are shown in Table 1.     Analyzing each patient for coronary territory, we obtained 297 territories, corresponding to 297 segments. CPM found altered in 73 segments (24.57%). Segments evaluated, 230 showed no significant CAD. Of these, 43 (18.7%) had altered CPM, as shown in Figure 1-A. Of the 67 segments showed significant CAD, 30 (44.8%) had changed CPM (Graph. 1-B). In chart 2 shows the distribution of scintigraphic changes according to the severity of coronary stenosis. The amended CPM was present in 18.7% (n = 43) of the territories with no significant stenosis, 45.28% (n = 24) of the territories with moderate stenosis and 42.8% (n = 6) of the territories with injuries serious. There was a significant association between the presence of CPM changed in over 50% and over 70% stenosis lesions. The Positive Predictive Value (PPV) of Angio TC for change CPM is 44.8% and the negative predictive value (NPV) is 81.3%. The sensitivity and specificity of CT angiography are respectively 41.1% and 83.5%. When analyzing the scans per patient about the possible variables that could explain the presence of altered scintigraphy, we find that, in the univariate analysis (Table 2), a history of hypertension (p = 0.01) and a history of previous angioplasty ( p = 0.04) were significantly associated with CPM changed. The presence of significant CAD by CT angiography (p = 0.01) also showed a correlation with the presence of CPM changed. According to multivariate logistic regression analysis (Table 3), the presence of significant lesions Angio CT was the only independent variable associated with altered presence of CPM (p = 0.018). Figure 1 shows the Angio CT of the patients in our series. A 66 year old patient, asymptomatic with exercise stress test with isolated electrocardiographic changes at peak exercise (10 METS reached the ramp protocol) was referred to Angio CT. The tomographic images (Figure 1) showed the presence of an obstructive lesion in the anterior descending artery, shortly after the emergence of the first diagonal artery. As the patient had excellent functional capacity and was asymptomatic, he was referred for stress scintigraphy and rest in order to quantify the area of ​​ischemia. Held similar physical stress to the previous and evaluation of perfusion images (Figure 2) is observed restricted perfusion defect ( < 5% of myocardial mass of the left ventricle) in the interventricular septum. There was no change in contractile scintigraphic images of GATED SPECT after stress. The patient was clinically driven and is more than two years of follow up, asymptomatic and without events.   Discussion The presence of myocardial ischemia is an important prognostic information. Patients who have significant ischemic areas have a poor prognosis when kept in clínico11 treatment. coronary stenoses are the main causes of myocardial ischemia, and its detection by morphological examination is essential for defining the therapeutic strategy. However, several studies have shown that there is a binary relationship between the existence of coronary stenoses greater than 50% diameter and the presence of isquemia12. In our study, we compared the results of the Angio CT with the CPM in patients with suspected or known CAD, and main observed conclusion was that the presence of obstructive lesions ( > 50%) have low predictive value for identifying myocardial ischemia CPM : only 44.8% of the territories with moderate or severe injury by angio CT showed abnormal CPM. This finding is similar to that obtained by Schuijf et al 12, who demonstrated significant CAD correspondence between the Angio CT and abnormal CPM in only 45% (33 of 73) of patients analyzed. Similar results have been reproduced by other authors in literatura13-15. This discordance between the methods is partly attributed to the limitations that the Angio CT has to demonstrate the physiological impact of coronary stenosis. By using the severity of coronary stenosis we are limiting ourselves to just one of the variables of atherosclerotic plaque that determine the coronary resistance, overlooking relevant aspects extent, shape and eccentricity, and the presence of stenoses in series, affecting important way blood flow . In addition, vascular tone, integrity of the microcirculation and collateral circulation, which are not assessed by morphological methods such as CT Angio, can contribute significantly to the scintigraphic and functional findings. The annual incidence of death or heart attack in patients with normal myocardial scintigraphy is less than 1%, as numerous studies and meta-análises16. Revascularization in patients who present no ischemia may be somewhat beneficial, or even counterproductive, as demonstrated by the study DEFER17; in patients in whom there was no functional significance there is safety in not performing intervention. The anatomical disagreement then proceeds to have an impact not only in the diagnosis as well as in decision-making regarding revascularization. The recent publication of the FAME study brought a lot of attention to this subject in this study, the assessment of the functional significance of coronary lesions invasively by Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR), which can detect with great accuracy the presence of funcional18 visual disagreement. The researchers observed that the FAME for all patients triple artery catheterization, only 14% of all lesions had functional significance (assessed by FFR) and, most importantly, 9% of patients presented no practical significance stenosis. A total of 1329 coronary lesions with more than 50% stenosis (with significant obstruction), only 816 lesions (61%) had functional significance, as FFR18. The Angio CT is excellent method for exclusion of CAD, a fact confirmed in our study, which found that most coronary territories with no significant injury also has normal CPM (VPN: 81%). Similar results were found by other investigadores12-15,19, which found that good accuracy of Angio CT to rule out ischemia. This suggests that in patients with coronary stenosis less than 50%, it should not be necessary to perform additional functional test. Evaluation of coronary stenosis severity is little need to CT angiography, in spatial resolution being lower than the coronary invasiva20,21, which entails inability to specify the degree of stenosis in a manner similar to that examination. This may have been responsible for the inability to demonstrate differences between the frequency of perfusion changes in patients with moderate stenosis (50% -70%) compared to patients with severe stenosis ( > 70%): 45.3% and 42 8%, respectively. However some groups have obtained different results from those found in other studies, where most of the patients with severe stenosis shows abnormal CPM. Probably this difference is due to the small number of patients with severe stenosis included in our study (n = 14). The evaluation of the cases were retrospective, which may limit the ability to obtain clinical information; however, as all tests were performed at the same institution, the correlation between the data obtained in both tests was performed. Another significant limitation is that patients often had the indication of the second test from the result of the first, which may have contributed to the increase in the number of discordant cases between the techniques, since the clinical findings added to the still first examination they could be associated with diagnostic uncertainty. The cases of strongly positive or clearly normal exams are rarely referred to new non-invasive tests as part of the diagnostic approach. However, one of the study's merits is to evaluate the use of these strategies in a real world situation.   Conclusions Angio CT demonstrated useful in excluding the diagnosis of CAD, but its accuracy to assess the severity of the injury is unsatisfactory. To this end, CPM has shown in several studies to be quite accurate. It follows therefore that Angio CT and CPM provide additional information about DAC, the first on the morphologic aspects and the second on the functional aspects. The way both techniques can be integrated into clinical practice is not yet fully clarified. In our study, when we include consecutive patients, we obtained a sample that is similar to that observed in clinical practice everyday, which makes our results of great importance.   authors of the contribution Conception and design of the research: Azevedo JC, EC Rochitte, ET Mosque, Mosque CT; Acquisition of data: Azevedo JC Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC Prezotti LS, LS Simões, Nacif MS Oliveira Junior AC, CT Mosque; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Azevedo JC Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC Prezotti LS, LS Simões, Nacif MS Oliveira Junior AC, ET Mosque, Mosque CT; Statistical analysis: Azevedo JC Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC Prezotti LS, LS Simões, ET Mosque, Mosque CT; Writing of the manuscript: Azevedo JC Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC Prezotti LS, LS Simões, CT Mosque; Critical revision of the manuscript for content intellectual: Azevedo JC, Nacif MS, CE Rochitte, Oliveira Junior AC, ET Mosque, CT Mosque. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   