ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Coronary angiography by multiple detectors (Angio CT) has shown good accuracy for the detection of coronary stenosis. Although this technique is promising for CAD's evaluation, its correlation with the functional manifestation of the disease is not well established. To evaluate the presence of CAD and the degree of coronary obstruction, assessed by Angio CT, it is associated with changes in the Scintigraphy Myocardial Perfusion (SMP) examination. METHODS: A retrospective observational study, which included 99 consecutive known or suspected patients of having CAD. There were tests of SMP and Angio CT. We are comparing the presence of perfusion defects by CPM in the presence of CAD and degree of luminal obstruction by CT angiography. It was used for statistical analysis the Student t test, ANOVA, chi-square test (or Fisher's exact test for n < 5). Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed and the significance criterion was the level of 5%. RESULTS: Average age was 62 Â ± 11.4 years, 46 (71.7%) of those, men. The analysis of variables was performed per patient (n = 99) and territory of coronary irrigation (n = 297). Of the 67 territories that had significant CAD by Angio CT, 44.8% had CPM changed. Considering the degree of stenosis, CPM changed was present in 18.7% of the territories with no significant stenosis, 45.28% of the territories with moderate stenosis and 42.8% of the territories with serious injuries. CONCLUSIONS: Angio CT is a good method for exclusion of CAD. However, its use for evaluation of stenosis severity and functional impact did not show good correlation. Keywords: Coronary Disease / diagnosis, CT, Heart / scintigraphy.     Introduction Despite major advances in understanding the pathophysiology of cardiovascular diseases and the development of new diagnostic methods, Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) still remains in the XXI century as one of the leading causes of death in Brazil and the world1,2. Although primary prevention is a priority for modern medicine, it is also necessary the development of additional diagnostic methods that assist in the early identification of CAD, since the rapid treatment is decisive for the outcome of the modification. Currently, coronary angiography is the gold standard method for the diagnosis of CAD; however, new noninvasive imaging methods, such as coronary angiography by multidetector CT scanner with (Angio CT), have been shown to be a reliable alternative for the diagnosis of this disease. Since this technique started to be used in clinical practice, there was a rapid improvement in the quality of the images obtained, allowing the expansion of the clinical application of this method whose accuracy, specificity and sensitivity to detect stenosis of the coronary arteries are already well established in literatura2-7. However, it is important to note that, as well as invasive coronary angiography, this method identifies the anatomic stenosis of the coronary arteries, but does not allow functional evaluation of injuries. Among the methods that assess the functional impact of coronary obstructive injuries there is the Scintigraphy Myocardial Perfusion (SMP), which has high accuracy in detecting myocardial ischemia, in addition to being a powerful tool to predict the risk of future coronary events, allowing the stratification of patients and guiding to better therapeutic attitudes8,9. Although Angio CT is a promising technique for evaluating CAD, its correlation with the functional manifestation of the disease is not well established and needs to be investigated. Thus, the objective of this study is to assess whether the existence of CAD and the degree of coronary obstruction assessed by Angio CT are associated with changes in the examination of CPM.   Methods We conducted a retrospective observational study in which consecutive patients were included, with suspected or confirmed CAD who underwent the Angio CT and CPM examinations from August 2006 to September 2009, with an interval less than 90 days between the two exams. The indication of the tests was at the attending physician's discretion, not being objective of the study to analyze the information. We used as sources of information the anamnesis sheets of Nuclear Medicine Service of the Pro-Cardiac Hospital and medical records of patients. Patients with previous surgical revascularization history and those with incomplete medical record data were excluded. The project was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Pro-Cardiac Hospital in Rio de Janeiro, under the record 412. We studied the characteristics: gender, age, risk factors for CAD (hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, physical inactivity, diabetes, family history, obesity) and previous CAD (acute myocardial infarction, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, coronary angiography with larger obstructive lesions 50%).   Objective The evaluated scintigraphic variables were: type of stress used; number of segments showing reversible perfusion defects (ischemia) and fixed defects (fibrosis) by qualitative and quantification analysis of these defects through software (QPS Cedars-Cinai and Emory Cardiac Toolbox); analysis of global and segmental contractility and ejection fraction by gated SPECT. The threading model used was 17 segmentos10. Scintigraphic examinations were classified as amended those with reversible or fixed perfusion defects. All CPM tests were performed at the Nuclear Medicine Service of the Pro-Cardiac Hospital in Rio de Janeiro in scintillation camera type Anger digital tomographic (Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography) of Siemens, E-Cam model of dual detector, collimator with low energy and high resolution. The results of scintigraphy were compared with the presence of coronary artery disease (CAD considered significant when the presence of luminal obstruction > 50%, and not significant CAD, < 50%), and degree of stenosis (not significant: < 50%; moderate : 50% -70%; severe: > 70%) assessed by CT Angio. The Angio CT scans were performed on LightSpeed VCT 64 GE Healthcare unit. Patients were between 5 and 20 mg of intravenous metoprolol to control heart rate (HR), obtaining FC average of 70 bpm. For calcium score analysis, conventional acquisition with prospective trigger and 3 mm of collimation was performed. In the angiographic analysis was performed using helical and prospective or retrospective trigger acquisition, according to the HR and weight of the patient, 0.625 mm collimation injection and 80 ml of non-ionic iodinated contrast media with 5.0 ml / s flow. 20 cardiac phases were reconstructed and was selected the one showing the lowest degree of cardiac movement in the coronary arteries. For the analysis were used axial images as source, multiplanar reformatting, curves and three-dimensional reconstructions by volume rendering in ADW4.3 workstation (GE Healthcare). The analysis was done for each patient (n = 99) and territory of coronary irrigation (n = 297). For statistical analysis, SPSS version 17 was used. Continuous variables were presented in mean and standard deviation format. We used the Student t test for the averages of these variables, and ANOVA analysis of variance. For categorical variables, the chi-square test or Fisher's exact test for n < 5. A multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed, and the significance criteria was 5%.   Results The study included 99 patients with a mean age of 62 Â ± 11.4 years and 71.7% were male; 6% had a history of myocardial infarction; 18% had previous coronary angioplasty with stent implantation. Of the total sample, 47% reported chest pain as the main reason for the examination and myocardial perfusion scintigraphy was the first method in 66% of patients. The interval between the examinations was 12.4 Â ± 17.5 days. The type of stress used in scintigraphy was drug in 52 patients and physical in 47 patients. The other baseline characteristics of the study population are shown in Table 1.     Analyzing each patient for coronary territory, we obtained 297 territories, corresponding to 297 segments. CPM has been found altered in 73 segments (24.57%).  Out of the evaluated segments, 230 showed no significant CAD. Out of these, 43 (18.7%) had altered CPM, as shown in Figure 1-A. Out of the 67 segments showed significant CAD, 30 (44.8%) had changed CPM (Graph. 1-B). In chart 2, we can observe the distribution of scintigraphic changing according to the severity of coronary stenosis. The amended CPM was present in 18.7% (n = 43) of the territories with no significant stenosis, 45.28% (n = 24) of the territories with moderate stenosis and 42.8% (n = 6) of the territories with serious injuries. There was a significant association between the presence of SMP altered in over 50% and over 70% stenosis lesions. The Positive Predictive Value (PPV) of Angio TC for a SMP alteration is 44.8% and the Negative Predictive Value (NPV) is 81.3%. The sensitivity and specificity of CT angiography are respectively 41.1% and 83.5%. When analyzing the scans per patient related to possible variables that could explain the presence of altered scintigraphy, we find that, in the univariate analysis (Table 2), a brief history of systemic artherial hypertension (p = 0.01) and a history of previous angioplasty (p = 0.04) were significantly associated with altered CPM. The presence of significant CAD by CT angiography (p = 0.01) also showed a correlation with the presence of SMP changed. According to multivariate logistic regression analysis (Table 3), the presence of significant lesions Angio CT was the only independent variable associated with altered presence of CPM (p = 0.018). Figure 1 shows the Angio CT of the patients in our series. A 66 year old patient, asymptomatic with exercise stress test with isolated electrocardiographic changes at peak exercise (10 METS reached the ramp protocol) was referred to Angio CT. The tomographic images (Image 1) show the presence of an obstructive lesion in the anterior descending artery, shortly after the emergence of the first diagonal artery. Since the patient had excellent functional capacity and was asymptomatic, he was referred for stress scintigraphy and rest, in order to quantify the area of ischemia. Held similar physical stress to the previous and evaluation of perfusion images (Figure 2) is observed restricted perfusion defect (< 5% of myocardial mass of the left ventricle) in the interventricular septum. There was no change in contractile scintigraphic images of GATED SPECT after stress. The patient was clinically driven and is more than two years of follow up, asymptomatic and without events.   Discussion The presence of myocardial ischemia is an important prognostic information. Patients who have significant ischemic areas have a poor prognosis when kept in clínico11 treatment. Coronary obstructions are the main causes of myocardial ischemia, and its detection through morphological examination is essential to define the therapeutic strategy. However, several studies have shown that there is a binary relationship between the existence of coronary stenoses greater than 50% diameter and the presence of isquemia12. In our study, we compared the results of the Angio CT with the CPM in patients with suspected or known CAD, and main observed conclusion was that the presence of obstructive lesions (> 50%) have low predictive value for identifying myocardial ischemia CPM : only 44.8% of the territories with moderate or severe injury by angio CT showed abnormal CPM. This finding is similar to that obtained by Schuijf et al 12, who demonstrated significant CAD correspondence between the Angio CT and abnormal SMP in only 45% (33 of 73) of patients analyzed. Similar results have been reproduced by other authors in literature13-15. This discordance between the methods is partly attributed to the limitations that the Angio CT has to demonstrate the physiological impact of coronary stenosis. By using the severity of coronary stenosis we are limiting ourselves to just one of the variables of atherosclerotic plaque that determine the coronary resistance, overlooking relevant aspects extent, shape and eccentricity, and the presence of stenoses in series, affecting important way blood flow. In addition, vascular tone, integrity of the microcirculation and collateral circulation, which are not assessed by morphological methods such as Angio CT, can contribute significantly to the scintigraphic and functional findings. The annual incidence of death or heart attack in patients with normal myocardial scintigraphy is less than 1%, as numerous studies and meta-análises16. Revascularization in patients who present no ischemia may be somewhat beneficial, or even counterproductive, as demonstrated by the DEFER study17; in patients in whom there was no functional significance there is security in not performing the intervention. The anatomical discordance then have an impact not only in the diagnosis, but also in decision-making regarding revascularization. The recent publication of the FAME study brought a lot of attention to this subject in this study, the assessment of the functional significance of coronary lesions invasively by Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR), which can detect with great accuracy the presence of funcional18 visual disagreement. FAME researchers observed that for all patients with triple artery catheterization, only 14% of all lesions had functional significance (assessed by FFR) and, most importantly, 9% of patients presented no stenosis with practical significance. From a total of 1,329 coronary lesions with more than 50% stenosis (with significant obstruction), only 816 lesions (61%) had functional significance, according to FFR18. The Angio CT is an excellent method for exclusion of CAD, a fact confirmed in our study, which found that most coronary territories, with no significant injury, also have normal SMP (NPV: 81%). Similar results were found by other investigadores12-15,19, which found that good accuracy of Angio CT to rule out ischemia. This suggests that in patients with coronary stenosis less than 50%, it should not be necessary to perform additional functional test. Evaluation of coronary stenosis severity is little need to CT angiography, in spatial resolution being lower than the coronary invasiva20,21, which entails inability to specify the degree of stenosis in a manner similar to that examination. This may have been responsible for the inability to demonstrate differences between the frequency of perfusion changes in patients with moderate stenosis (50% -70%) compared to patients with severe stenosis (> 70%): 45.3% and 42 8%, respectively. However some groups have obtained different results from those found in other studies, where most of the patients with severe stenosis show abnormal CPM. This difference is probably due to the small number of patients with severe stenosis included in our study (n = 14). The evaluation of the cases was retrospective, which may limit the ability to obtain clinical information; however, as all tests were performed at the same institution, the correlation between the data obtained in both tests was performed. Another significant limitation is that patients often had the indication of the second test from the result of the first, which may have contributed to the increase in the number of discordant cases between the techniques, since the clinical findings added to the still first examination they could be associated with diagnostic uncertainty. The cases of strongly positive or clearly normal exams are rarely sent to new non-invasive tests as part of the diagnostic strategy. However, one of the study's merits is to evaluate the use of these strategies in a real world situation.   Conclusions Angio CT demonstrated useful in excluding the diagnosis of CAD, but its accuracy to assess the severity of the injury is unsatisfactory. To this end, CPM has shown in several studies to be quite accurate. Therefore is concluded that Angio CT and CPM provide additional information about DAC, first on the morphologic aspects and second on the functional aspects. The way both techniques can be integrated into the clinical practice is not yet fully clarified. In our study, when we include consecutive patients, we obtained a sample that is similar to that observed in clinical practice everyday, which makes our results of great importance.   Authors of the contribution Conception and design of the research: Azevedo JC, Rochitte CE, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT; Acquisition of data: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Nacif MS, Oliveira Junior AC, Mesquita CT; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Nacif MS, Oliveira Junior AC, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT; Statistical analysis: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT; Writing of the manuscript: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Mesquita CT; Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Azevedo JC, Nacif MS, Rochitte CE, Oliveira Junior AC, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT. Potential Conflict of Interest. I affirm that there is no relevant potential conflict of interest. Sources of Funding. This study had no external funding sources. Academic association. There is no association of this study with post-graduation programs.   