 SUMMARY background: THE angiotomografia coronary artery by multi-detector (Angio CT) has shown good accuracy for detection of stenosis of coronary. Although this technique is promising for evaluation of the DAC, its correlation with the manifestation of functional disease is not yet well established. OBJECTIVE: to Evaluate whether the presence of cad and the degree of obstruction, coronary assessed by Angio CT is associated with changes in the examination Scintigraphy of Myocardial Perfusion (CPM). METHODS: the Study was observational, retrospective study that included consecutive 99 patients with cad known or suspected. Conducted examinations of CPM and Angio CT. We compared the presence of defects of perfusion by the CPM, with the presence of cad and degree of obstruction luminal by Angio CT. It was used for the statistical analysis the Student's t-test, ANOVA, chi-square test (or Fisher's exact test for n < 5). Was performed multivariate analysis by logistic regression, and the criterion of significance was the level of 5%. RESULTS: THE mean age was 62 Â± 11.4 years, being 46 (71,7%) were men. The analysis of the variables was performed by patient (n = 99) and for the territory of irrigation, coronary (n = 297). Of the 67 territories that had DAC-significant for Angio CT, 44,8% presented CPM changed. Considering the degree of stenosis, the CPM changed was present in 18.7% of territories with stenosis not significant, 45,28% of territories with stenosis moderate and 42,8% of the territories with severe injuries. CONCLUSIONS: Angio CT is a good method for exclusion of cad. However, their use for assessment of the severity of the stenosis and its functional repercussion has not shown good correlation. Key words: Disease of the Coronary arteries / diagnosis, Computed Tomography, Heart / scintigraphy. Introduction despite the important advances in the understanding of the pathophysiology of cardiovascular diseases and the creation of new diagnostic methods, Coronary Artery Disease (cad) still remains in the XXI century as one of the leading causes of death in Brazil and in the world1,2. Although primary prevention be a priority for modern medicine, also it is necessary to develop diagnostic methods are complementary to assist in the early identification of the DAC, since fast treatment is decisive for the modification of prognosis. Currently, coronary angiography is the standard method of reference for the diagnosis of IPC; however, new noninvasive imaging methods, such as the angiotomografia coronary artery by the ct scanner with multidetectores (Angio CT), have been shown to be a trustworthy alternative for the diagnosis of this disease. Since this technique began to be used in clinical practice, there has been a rapid evolution in the quality of the images obtained, allowing the expansion of the clinical application of this method whose accuracy, specificity and sensitivity to detect stenosis of the coronary arteries are already well established in the literatura2-7. However, it is important to note that, as well as the coronary angiography is invasive, this method identifies the stenosis anatomical of the coronary arteries, but does not allow for functional assessment of lesions. Among the methods that evaluate the functional repercussion of the lesions obstructive coronary stands the Scintigraphy of Myocardial Perfusion (CPM) that has a great accuracy to detect myocardial ischemia, in addition to being a powerful tool for predicting the risk of coronary events in future, allowing to stratify patients and guide to a better conduct terapêutica8,9. Although the Angio CT is a promising technique to evaluate the DAC, its correlation with the manifestation of functional disease is not yet well established and needs to be investigated. On the face of it, the aim of this study is to evaluate if the existence of the IPC and the degree of obstruction, coronary assessed by Angio CT is associated with changes in the examination of the CPM. Methods it Was realized a study observational, retrospective, in which were included consecutive patients with chd is suspected or confirmed, who carried out the examinations of Angio CT scan and the CPM in the period from August 2006 to September 2009, with a range of less than 90 days between the two examinations. The indication of the examination was at the discretion of the medical practitioner, not being a purpose of the study the analysis of the indications. We use as sources of information in the chips of the history of the Service of Nuclear Medicine of the Hospital Pró-Cardiac and medical records of the patients. Were excluded from the study patients with history of coronary artery bypass surgery prior to and those with data of medical records incomplete. The project was approved by the Ethics Committee in Research of the Hospital Pró-Heart of Rio de Janeiro, under the registration 412. We studied the characteristics: sex, age, risk factors for cad (systemic arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, sedentary lifestyle, diabetes, family history, obesity) and DAC prior (acute myocardial infarction, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty percutaneous transluminal, coronary angiography with obstructive lesions greater than 50%). Objective variables scintigraphic were evaluated: type of stress used; the number of segments showing defects of perfusion reversible (ischemia) and defects fixed (fibrosis) by the qualitative analysis and quantification of these defects by means of software (QPS-Cedars Cinai and Emory Cardiac Toolbox); analysis of contractility and global target, and ejection fraction by Gated SPECT. The threading model used was the 17-segmentos10. The examinations scintigraphic classified as changed were those that presented defects of perfusion and reversible or fixed. All examinations of CPM were performed in the Service of Nuclear Medicine of the Hospital Pro-Heart of Rio de Janeiro, in the chamber of flickering of the type Anger tomographic digital (Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography) of the brand Siemens, model E-Cam dual detector with a collimator of low energy and high resolution. The results obtained by scintigraphy were compared with the presence of coronary heart disease (being considered DAC-significant in the presence of an obstruction to luminal > 50%, and the IPC is not significant, < 50%), and the degree of stenosis (not significant: < 50%; moderate: 50%-70%; severe: > 70%) assessed by Angio CT. The exams Angio CT were carried out in the unit LightSpeed VCT 64, GE Healthcare. The patients received between 5 and 20 mg of metoprolol intravenous to control the Heart rate (HR), with average HR of 70 bpm. For the analysis of calcium score was performed the acquisition with conventional trigger prospective and 3-mm collimation. In the analysis angiográfica used-if purchase coil and trigger prospective or retrospective, according to the FC, and weight of the patient, with 0,625 mm collimation and injection of 80 mL iodinated contrast non-ionic with a flow of 5.0 mL/s Were rebuilt 20-phase disease, and selected the one that presented the smallest degree of movement heart at the level of the coronary arteries. For the analysis we used images axial sources, reformatações multiplanares, curves and three-dimensional reconstructions for volume rendering, workstation, ADW4.3 (GE Healthcare). The analysis was performed by patient (n = 99) and for the territory of irrigation, coronary (n = 297). For the statistical analysis, was used SPSS software, version 17. Continuous variables were presented in the format of mean and standard deviation of the mean. We used the Student's t-test for the averages of these variables, and ANOVA for analysis of variance. For the categorical variables we used the chi-square test or Fisher's exact test for n < 5. Was performed multivariate analysis by logistic regression, and the criterion of significance was the level of 5%. Results Were included in the study 99 patients with a mean age of 62 Â± 11.4 years, and 71,7% were male; 6% had history of myocardial infarction; 18% had coronary angioplasty prior stent implantation. Of the total sample, 47% reported chest pain as the main reason of the completion of the examination and scintigraphy of myocardial perfusion was the first method in 66% of patients. The interval between the tests was 12.4 Â± 17,5 days. The type of stress employed in scintigraphy was pharmacological in 52 patients and physical in 47 patients. The other basic characteristics of the studied population are shown in table 1. By analyzing each patient by the territory of the coronary artery, we obtained 297 territories, corresponding to 297 segments. The CPM found itself changed in 73 segments (24,57%). Of the segments assessed, 230 presented to the DAC, not significant. Of these, 43 (18,7%) had CPM changed, as shown in chart 1-A. Of 67 segments that presented DAC-significant, 30 (44,8%) had CPM changed (gráf. 1-B). In graphic 2 we observe the distribution of the changes scintigraphic according to the severity of the stenosis, coronary. The CPM changed was present in 18,7% (n = 43) of the territories with stenosis not significant, 45,28% (n = 24) of the territories with stenosis moderate and 42,8% (n = 6) of the territories with severe injuries. There was a significant association of the presence of CPM changed in injuries above 50% and in lesions greater than 70% stenosis. The Positive Predictive Value (PPV) of Angio CT for CPM changed is 44.8%, and the Negative Predictive Value (VPN) is 81.3%. The sensitivity and specificity of Angio TC are, respectively, 41.1% and 83,5%. To analyze the scintigraphy by the patient as to the possible variables that could explain the presence of scintigraphy changed, we see that, in the univariate analysis (Table 2), the previous history of systemic arterial hypertension (p = 0.01) and a history of angioplasty prior (p = 0.04) showed a statistically significant association with CPM changed. The presence of DAC-significant for the Angio TC (p = 0.01) also showed association with the presence of CPM changed. According to the multivariate analysis of logistic regression (Table 3), the presence of significant injury on the Angio CT was the only independent variable associated with the presence of CPM changed (p = 0.018). In figure 1 we demonstrate the Angio TC of one of the patients of our series. A patient of 66 years, asymptomatic, with exercise stress testing with electrocardiographic abnormalities isolated at the peak of the effort (reached 10 METS in the protocol of the Ramp) was referred for Angio CT. The images tomographic (Figure 1) showed the presence of an obstructing lesion in the artery descending earlier, soon after the emergence of the first artery the diagonal. As the patient had excellent functional capacity and was asymptomatic, was referred for scintigraphy stress and rest in order to quantify the area of ischemia. Conducted physical stress similar to the previous one, and in the evaluation of the images of perfusion (Figure 2) is observed if the defect perfusion analysis restricted (< 5% of the mass of the myocardial left ventricle) in the interventricular septum. There was no change in contractile in the scintigraphic images of GATED SPECT post-stress. The patient was conducted clinically, and is more than two years of follow-up, asymptomatic and without events. Discussion The presence of myocardial ischemia is an important prognostic. Patients who have areas of ischemia significant have a worse prognosis when retained in treatment clínico11. Coronary artery obstructions are the main causes of myocardial ischemia, and its detection by means of examinations of morphology is essential in the definition of the therapeutic strategy. However, several studies have demonstrated that there is a binary relationship between the existence of stenosis, coronary artery greater than 50% diameter and the presence of isquemia12. In our study, we compared the results of Angio CT with those of the CPM in patients with cad known or suspected, and the main conclusion found was that the presence of obstructive lesions (> 50%) has low predictive value for the identification of myocardial ischemia to the CPM: the only 44,8% of the territories with injury moderate or severe by angio CT showed CPM abnormal. This finding is similar to that obtained by Schuijf and colleagues.12, which showed correspondence between DAC-significant for the Angio CT and CPM abnormal in only 45% (33 of 73) of the patients analyzed. Similar results have been reproduced by other authors in the literatura13-15. This disagreement between the methods is partially attributed to the limitations that the Angio CT has to demonstrate the effects physiological of the stenosis, coronary. By harnessing the severity of the stenosis, coronary are we limiting ourselves to only one of the variables of the atherosclerotic plaque that determine the resistance in the coronary, neglecting relevant aspects such as extension, shape, and eccentricity, in addition to the presence of strictures in the series, that affect so important to the blood flow. In addition, tone the vascular integrity of the microcirculation and collateral circulation, which are not evaluated by the methods of morphology such as the Angio TC, can contribute significantly to the findings of scintigraphic and functional. The annual incidence of death or infarction in patients with myocardial scintigraphy normal is less than 1%, as numerous studies and meta-análises16. Revascularizar patients in which there is ischemia present, can be little beneficial, or even counterproductive, as shown by the study DEFER17; in patients in which there was no functional significance there is safety in not undertaking the intervention. The disagreement anatomofuncional then goes on to have an impact not only in diagnosis but also in decision-making regarding revascularization. The recent publication of the study, FAME brought a lot of attention to this subject in this study, the assessment of the functional significance of lesions coronary invasive by the Booking Fractional Flow (FFR), which can detect with great accuracy the presence of mismatch visual funcional18. Researchers at the FAME observed that of all patients triarteriais to catheterization only in 14% of all lesions had functional significance (assessed by the FFR), and, more importantly, 9% of the patients had no stenosis with functional significance. A total of 1.329 lesions coronary artery with 50% stenosis (obstruction significant), only 816 lesions (61%) had functional significance, as the FFR18. The Angio CT is an excellent method to the exclusion of the DAC, a fact confirmed in our study, in which we found that the majority of territories of coronary lesion, not significant also features CPM normal (VPN: 81%). A similar result was found by other investigadores12-15,19, who found that good accuracy of Angio CT to exclude ischemia. This suggests that in patients with stenosis of coronary artery less than 50%, should not be required to perform functional testing additional. The assessment of the severity of stenosis of coronary artery is little need to with the Angio CT, its spatial resolution is lower than that of coronary angiography invasiva20,21, which implies the inability to specify the degree of stenosis of similar form to that examination. This fact may have been responsible for the inability to demonstrate differences between the frequency of changes of perfusion in patients with stenosis moderate (50%-70%) in comparison to patients with severe stenosis (> 70%): by 45.3% and 42,8%, respectively. However some groups have obtained different results from those found in other studies, where most patients with severe stenosis presents CPM abnormal. Probably, this difference is due to the reduced number of patients with severe stenosis included in our study (n = 14). The assessment of the cases was retrospective, which may limit the ability to obtain medical information; however, as all tests have been carried out in the same institution, was carried out the correlation between the data obtained in both the exams. Another significant limitation is that the patients often had the clinical indication of the second examination, from the result of the first, which may have contributed to the increase in the number of cases discordant between the techniques, since the clinical findings added to the total of the first examination could still be associated with the doubt of the diagnosis. The cases of tests strongly positive or clearly normal are rarely directed to new non-invasive tests as part of the diagnostic approach. However, one of the merits of the study is to evaluate the use of these strategies in a situation of the real world. Conclusions The Angio CT demonstrated great usefulness in the exclusion of the diagnosis of CHD, however its accuracy to assess the severity of the injuries is unsatisfactory. To this end, the CPM has already shown in several studies to be quite accurate. It is concluded, therefore, that Angio CT and CPM provide complementary information about the IPC, the first on the morphological aspects and the second on the functional aspects. How both techniques can be integrated in clinical practice is not yet fully clarified. In our study, including consecutive patients, we obtained a sample that resembles to the one observed in the daily clinical practice, which makes our results highly relevant. Contribution of authors Conception and design of the research: Azevedo JC, Rochitte CE, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT; Acquisition of data: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira CF, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Nacif MS, Oliveira Junior AC, Mesquita CT; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira CF, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Nacif MS, Oliveira Junior AC, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT; Statistical analysis: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira FC, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT; Writing of the manuscript: Azevedo JC, Ferreira Junior DS, Vieira CF, Prezotti LS, Simões LS, Mesquita CT; Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Azevedo JC, Nacif MS, Rochitte CE, Oliveira Junior AC, Mesquita ET, Mesquita CT. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 