ABSTRACT The transplantation of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) causes immunosuppression and predisposes to the development of rhinosinusitis. The computed tomography (CT) scan of the paranasal sinuses may help diagnose rinossinusopatias in these patients, but the realization in all these patients is questionable. To assess the need for CT in candidate to HSCT and relate the tomographic alterations to rinossinusopatias post HSCT. METHODS: Study prospective pilot in the sinus CT was performed before and after HSCT and evaluated according to the classification of Lund and Mackay. RESULTS: We obtained 77.5% and 61% of normal CT before and after HSCT, respectively. The tomographic stadium before HSCT was not related to the occurrence of rhinosinusitis after HSCT. The anatomical variations found (19.4%) were not related to the occurrence of rhinosinusitis, but with the severity of rhinosinusitis after HSCT. There was no significant association between previous CT staging and development of post-HSCT rhinosinusitis. CONCLUSION: There is no need for computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses in all patients prior to HSCT; and the anatomical variation predisposes to not rhinosinusitis before or after bone marrow transplantation, can only worsen the development of rhinosinusitis after HSCT. Keywords: sinusitis, CT, x-ray, bone marrow transplantation.     INTRODUCTION The transplantation of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a reality in today tertiary hospitals. In the last six years there has been a progressive increase of transplants in Brazil, with the completion of more than seven thousand transplants in this period. There was also an increase of 37% in the hematopoietic stem cell transplants in 2008, according to the National Ministry of Health Transplant Brasileiro1 Service. It is known that the transplanted hematopoietic stem cells undergoes a previous immunosuppression due to chemotherapy or whole body radiation. Thus, these patients are at increased risk of viral, bacterial or fungal infections, mainly of the upper airways (VAS), as they are in direct contact with the environment externo2-7. Other aggravating factors for triggering respiratory infections are described as prolonged hospitalization, Graft versus host disease, corticoterapia2-7. It is known that the risk of this patient has rhinosinusitis after transplantation is 37%, whereas the prevalence of rhinosinusitis in immunocompetent patients is only 15% 3.8. Numerous preparatory exams HSCT are performed by hematology, including radiography of the paranasal sinuses, which is made in all patients to diagnose a sinus disease. The computed tomography of paranasal sinuses before transplantation to all patients is advocated by some authors, in order to prevent the occurrence of rhinosinusitis after HSCT, since there is a higher risk due to imunossupressão.5,7,9, 10 According to the Brazilian Guidelines on rhinosinusitis, the diagnosis of rhinosinusitis depends not only on radiography of the paranasal sinuses, which is insufficiently specific (79%) and sensitive (76%). 11,12 currently, it is recommended that the analysis of the story clinical, physical examination, and more specifically to endoscopic which together can complete a diagnosis of rhinosinusitis. Computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses (CT) is performed only in the persistence of post-treatment symptoms, recurrence or complication of a rinossinusite.12 this way, the physical examination and nasal endoscopy would be an effective evaluation to the patient in the pre- HSCT. However, some authors recommend performing CT of the paranasal sinuses in all patients before HSCT, showing that the occurrence of signs suggestive of rhinosinusitis in this examination and also its intensity, would be prognostic factors efetivos.5,6,7,9 10 Carrying out CT in all patients prior to transplantation may increase the preparation time for the transplant, as radiology services have a great demand for routine tests, and increase spending. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to verify the need for computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses in all patients before HSCT, and the relationship between tomography findings of prior nasosinusal disease and the development of rhinosinusitis after HSCT.   METHOD This is a prospective pilot study in Rhinology of Otorhinolaryngology with approval of the Research Ethics Committee (protocol 088-2002). We evaluated 31 patients transplanted hematopoietic stem cells Bone Marrow Transplant Unit between 2003 and 2004. All patients underwent clinical evaluation and nasal endoscopy and CT scan of paranasal sinuses before and after HSCT. None of these patients had undergone nasal surgery before. Patients with predisposing factors such as smoking, asthma and nasal polyposis. Patients who did not undergo CT scan before and after transplantation were excluded. Were used for the diagnosis of rhinosinusitis criteria defined in the Brazilian Guidelines on Rhinosinusitis of 2008.12 Thus, nasal congestion symptoms, cough, fever, facial pain, purulent rhinorrhea as well as purulent discharge in the middle meatus and / or sphenoethmoidal nasal endoscopy, and / or opacification of the sinus computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses, featuring rinossinusite.12 on CT anatomical changes were analyzed (septal deviation, altered unciform process, concha bullosa, paradoxical middle turbinate, Haller cells) and rhinosinusitis signs (veiling all or part of the paranasal sinuses) 13-15. For tomographic staging rhinosinusitis, we used the classification proposed by Lund and Mackay.13 this stage, each paranasal sinus is scored from 0 to 2, depending on the degree of opacification. It is considered zero score when there are no abnormalities, score 1, when there is partial opacification and 2, when there is complete opacification. It also points out the ostiomeatal complex as the degree of obstruction, and zero for the absence of obstruction and two for obstruction. Thus, the highest score is the greater involvement of the paranasal sinuses, or greater severity of rhinosinusitis. The total scores ranged from 0 to 24 points, considering the right and left sides. the relationships between anatomical changes and / or degree of staging the CT and the development of RS after HSCT were analyzed. For statistical analysis, we used the Fisher test.   RESULTS Thirty-one patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation predominantly allogeneic (90%) of the medium, being 19 women (61%), 12 men (39%). The follow-up of these patients was on average 12 months. Five patients (16.1%) had a clinical diagnosis of rhinosinusitis before HSCT; and ten patients (32.2%) in post-HSCT, being the most affected maxillary sinus was followed by the anterior ethmoid (Table 1). Only seven patients (22.5%) had prior CT staging HSCT rhinosinusitis for greater than 1; and twelve (39%) after HSCT, ie 77.5% of scans were normal in pre-BMT and 61%, after HSCT. Of the seven patients with positive stage for rhinosinusitis before HSCT, two (29%) had CT findings after HSCT, two (29%) maintained the same staging and three (42%) worsened the degree of staging. Of the patients with rhinosinusitis after transplantation, six (50%) had CT staging greater than 2, without having to pre-HSCT TC changed. Only six (19.4%) patients had variants or anatomical changes in nasal cavity and / or paranasal sinuses, such as septal deviation (3), middle concha bullosa (3) and cell Haller (1). The nasal anatomical variations and / or paranasal sinuses were not significantly associated with a higher occurrence of rhinosinusitis before HSCT and even after HSCT (Tables 2 and 3).         However, the anatomical changes were significantly associated with a higher score of CT staging for post-transplant rhinosinusitis ( > 2) and can be considered an aggravating factor for the blocking middle meatus after transplantation (Figure 1). Regarding blockage of the osteomeatal complex, most of the group with anatomical abnormalities presented in score 2 staging CT (Table 4).         The association between CT staging of paranasal sinuses before transplantation and rhinosinusitis after BMT was not significant (Table 5).     DISCUSSION higher probability of rhinosinusitis after HSCT is caused by immunosuppression, and other aggravating factors such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy prior, viral infections or graft versus hospedeiro.2-7 literature studies presented in these transplanted, the estimated frequency rhinosinusitis 36.9% .3 the rate found in this study (32.2%) corresponded approximately to this estimate. Despite the small number of patients in this study, normal tomographic finding, before HSCT, it was much higher (77%) of the literature shows (51- 48%). 5,6,9 Half of the patients in this study who presented rhinosinusitis after HSCT had no sinonasal tomographic alterations and or clinical diagnosis of previous rhinosinusitis. Approximately 57% of patients with pretransplant tomographic alterations had post-transplant rhinosinusitis, but there was no significant correlation. The retrospective study of Thompson et al. also found no association between CT findings and nasosinusal symptoms pretransplant and the development of rhinosinusitis after transplante.6 Although there is a larger sample of 100 pre-transplant patients surveyed in a period of ten years, only 64 CT scans of paranasal sinuses 100 patients after TCTH.6 in contrast, Shaw et al. studied 26 patients and associated tomographic pretransplant changes to the development of rhinosinusitis after transplante.5 The percentage of worsening of rhinosinusitis in post-BMT (42%) in previously affected patients was lower than that found by Billings et al. (66.7%). 9 These differences in results can be explained by the age of the evaluated groups, which were exclusively adults in our study and in Thompson, and children, in the study of Billings and Shaw. Thompson also justifies this difference by the treatment of sinonasal diseases to pre-HSCT, which was not made clear in studies of Billings and Shaw. In this study, all patients were treated before transplantation when presented nasal disorders. Considering that this study is a prospective pilot project in order to verify the feasibility of carrying out the CT scan of the paranasal sinuses in all transplant candidates, it is not necessary sample size calculation. Furthermore, the literature does not provide similar prospective studies corroborating the use of CT before HSCT. It should be noted that most of the work related to the transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells have small sample due to the limited number of transplants. Therefore, a large sample would only be possible in a multicenter study. In the period in which the patients in this study were evaluated (2003 and 2004), there were 79 transplants of hematopoietic stem cells in allogeneic Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit of Blood Center / HC-UNICAMP. It is estimated an average of 40 allogeneic transplants between 2002 and 2004 in this sector. The lack of association between anatomical variation and the occurrence of rhinosinusitis before and after the transplant corresponds to literature findings related to chronic rhinosinusitis in patients imunocompetentes.14,15 Therefore, surgical management of patients with anatomical variations, prior to HSCT, to prevent the occurrence of post-transplant rhinosinusitis is not indicated. However, there was an association of anatomical variation with the worsening of rhinosinusitis after HSCT. Increasing the sample may define this association. The performance of CT scan of the paranasal sinuses for all patients before HSCT does not seem necessary, since there was no significant association between sinonasal tomographic changes and occurrence of post-transplant rhinosinusitis. Some authors have suggested computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses for all patients before transplantation, they demonstrated that the severity of tomographic alterations before HSCT would be related to rhinosinusitis occurrence in post-TCTH.5,9 this way the indication for CT scan of the paranasal sinuses would be reserved only for candidates for HSCT with clinical and endoscopic sinonasal changes consistent with rhinosinusopathy.   CONCLUSION Although the sample was small due to the small number of transplants, the computed tomography of paranasal sinuses before transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells does not appear to be necessary in all patients, unless the patient has evidence of previous sinonasal disease. Tomographic sinus suggestive of rhinosinusitis in pretransplant, observed in this study may be related to the worsening of rhinosinusitis after transplantation, as well as sinonasal anatomical variations found appear to be associated with the occurrence of more severe rhinosinusitis after transplantation bone marrow.   