 SUMMARY THE stem cell transplantation hematopoietic (TCTH) causes immunosuppression and predisposes to the development of rhinosinusitis. The realization of computed tomography (CT) of the paranasal sinuses may aid in the diagnosis of rinossinusopatias in these patients, but the realization in all these patients is questionable. OBJECTIVE: to determine the need for CT for the candidates to TCTH and relate the changes tomographic found the rinossinusopatias post-TCTH. METHOD: a pilot Study prospective in that the CT scan of paranasal sinuses was performed before and after the TCTH and evaluated according to the classification of Lund and Mackay. RESULTS: we obtained 77.5% for and 61% of CT normal in the pre-and post-TCTH, respectively. The stadium ct pre-TCTH did not correlate to the occurrence of rhinosinusitis after the TCTH. The anatomical variations found (by 19.4%) not related to the occurrence of rhinosinusitis, but rather with the severity of rhinosinusitis in post-TCTH. There was no significant association between staging ct prior and the development of rhinosinusitis post-TCTH. CONCLUSION: there is No need to perform computed tomography of paranasal sinuses in all patients prior to the TCTH; and the anatomical variation does not predispose to rhinosinusitis, neither before nor after bone marrow transplantation, can only aggravate the evolution of rhinosinusitis after the TCTH. Key words: sinusitis, computed tomography x-ray, bone-marrow transplant. INTRODUCTION THE stem cell transplantation hematopoietic (TCTH) is a reality in hospitals to tertiary today. In the past six years, there was a progressive increase of transplants in Brazil, with more than seven thousand transplants in this period. There was also a 37% increase in stem cell transplants hematopoietic in the year of 2008, according to the National Service for Transplantation of the Ministry of Health Brasileiro1. It is known that the transplanted stem cells hematopoietic submits a immunosuppression prior due to chemotherapy or radiation therapy of the whole body. In this way, these patients have a higher risk of infections, viral, bacterial or fungal infection, mainly of the upper airways (VAS), since they are in direct contact with the environment externo2-7. Other aggravating factors for the trigger of lower respiratory tract infections are described, as prolonged time of hospitalization, the Disease of the Graft against the Host, corticoterapia2-7. It is known that the risk of this patient display a rhinosinusitis after transplantation is 37%, while the prevalence of rhinosinusitis in the patient imunocompetente is only 15% for 3.8. Numerous examinations preparatory to the TCTH are performed by the hematology, including x-ray of the paranasal sinuses, which is done in all patients to diagnose a sinus disease prior to transplantation. The realization of computed tomography of paranasal sinuses prior to transplantation for all patients is advocated by some authors, in order to prevent the occurrence of rhinosinusitis in post-TCTH, since there is a greater risk due to immunosuppression.5,7,9,10 According to the Brazilian Guidelines on Rhinosinusitis, the diagnosis of rhinosinusitis depends not only on radiography of the paranasal sinuses, which is a little examination specific (79%) and sensitive (76%).11,12 Currently, it is recommended the analysis of the clinical history, physical examination, and more specifically the nasal endoscopy, which, together, can complete the diagnosis of rhinosinusitis. The computed tomography of paranasal sinuses (CT) is performed only in the persistence of symptoms post-treatment, recurrence or complication of rhinosinusitis.12 in This way, the physical examination complemented by nasal endoscopy would be an efficient evaluation for the patient in the pre-TCTH. However, there are authors who recommend performing CT of paranasal sinuses in all patients in the pre-TCTH, showing that the occurrence of signs suggestive of rhinosinusitis in this exam and also its intensity, would be prognostic factors effective.5,6,7,9,10 Perform CT in all patients prior to transplantation can increase the time to prep for the transplant, because the radiology services have a large demand of routine tests, in addition to increasing the expenses. Therefore, the proposal of this work was to verify the need for carrying out computed tomography of paranasal sinuses in all patients in the pre-TCTH, and the relationship between changes tomographic of nasosinusal diseases pre-and the development of rhinosinusitis in post-TCTH. METHOD this is a pilot study, prospective conducted in the Sector of Rinologia of the Discipline of Otorhinolaryngology, with approval from the Ethics Committee in Research (protocol 088-2002). Were evaluated in 31 patients transplanted stem cells hematopoietic cells of the Unit of Bone Marrow Transplantation between the years 2003 and 2004. All were submitted to clinical evaluation and endoscopic nasal and computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses before and after the TCTH. None of these patients had previous surgical nasal. Were excluded patients with predisposing factors such as smoking, asthma and nasal polyposis. The patients who did not undergo computed tomography before and after transplantation were excluded. Were used for the diagnosis of rhinosinusitis the criteria defined in the Brazilian Guidelines on Rhinosinusitis 2008.12 in This way, symptoms of nasal congestion, cough, fever, facial pain, runny nose purulent in addition to the purulent secretion in meatos medium and/or a recess esfenoetmoidal in the nasal endoscopy, and/or opacification of the sinuses on computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses, characterized rhinosinusitis.12 In ct, were analyzed anatomical abnormalities (septal deviation, unciform process changed, middle concha bullosa, concha average paradoxical, cells of Haller), and signs of rhinosinusitis (opacification of all or part of the paranasal sinuses)13-15. For staging ct for rhinosinusitis, we used the classification proposed by Lund and Mackay.13 in This stage, each paranasal sinus is scored from 0 to 2, according to the degree of opacification. It is considered the score of zero when there are no abnormalities, a score of 1, when there is opacification partial and, 2, when there is opacification the total. Scores also the complex ostiomeatal as the degree of obstruction, being zero in the absence of obstruction, and 2 for obstruction. In this way, the highest score corresponds to the greater involvement of the paranasal sinuses, that is, greater severity of rhinosinusitis. The total points earned ranged from 0 to 24 points, considering the right and left sides. We analyzed the relationships between anatomical changes and/or the degree of staging in CT and the development of RS in post-TCTH. For statistical analysis of the data, we used Fisher's exact Test. RESULTS Thirty-one patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation predominantly allogeneic (90%) form evaluated, and 19 women (61%) and 12 men (39%). The follow-up time of these patients was a median of 12 months. Five patients (16,1%) had a clinical diagnosis of rhinosinusitis in pre-TCTH; and, ten patients (32,2%) in post - TCTH, and the paranasal sinus most affected was the maxillary, followed by the etmoide earlier (Table 1). Only seven patients (22,5%) had staging ct prior to the TCTH for rhinosinusitis greater than 1; and twelve (39%) in post-TCTH, namely, 77,5% of the ct scans were normal in the pre-BMT and 61% in post-TCTH. Of the seven patients with both positive for rhinosinusitis in pre-TCTH, two (29%) had no changes tomographic after the TCTH, two (29%) kept the same staging and three (42%) worsened the degree of staging. Of the patients who had rhinosinusitis in the post-transplant, six (50%) had staging ct of greater than 2, without having the TC pre-TCTH changed. Only six (19,4%) patients had variants or anatomical changes in the nasal cavity and/ or paranasal sinuses, such as nasal septum deviation (3), middle concha bullosa (3) and cell Haller (1). The anatomical variations of the nasal and/or paranasal sinuses is not associated with significantly higher occurrence of rhinosinusitis in pre-TCTH and not even in post-TCTH (Tables 2 and 3). However, the anatomical changes were associated with significantly a higher score on the staging ct for rhinosinusitis post-transplant (>2), which can be considered an aggravating factor for the blocking of meatos average in the post-transplant (Figure 1). In relation to the block of the complex ostiomeatal, the largest part of the group with the anatomical changes presented score 2 in the staging ct (Table 4). The association between the staging ct of paranasal sinuses prior to transplantation and the occurrence of rhinosinusitis after the BMT was not significant (Table 5). DISCUSSION THE higher probability of occurrence of rhinosinusitis after the TCTH is caused by immunosuppression, in addition to other aggravating factors such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy prior viral infections, or disease of the graft against the host.2-7 Studies in the literature have presented, in these transplant patients, the estimated frequency of rhinosinusitis by 36.9%.3 The frequency found in this work (32,2%), corresponded approximately to this estimated percentage. Despite the small number of patients in this study, the finding ct the normal, in the pre-TCTH, was much higher (77%) of what the literature shows (51 - 48%).5,6,9 Half of the patients in this study who presented rhinosinusitis after the TCTH had no changes tomographic nasosinusal and not a clinical diagnosis of rhinosinusitis prior. Approximately 57% of the patients with changes to tomographic pre-transplant had rhinosinusitis, post-transplant, but there was no significant correlation. The retrospective study of Thompson et al. also no association was found between findings of ct or nasosinusal symptoms and pre-transplantation and the development of rhinosinusitis after a transplant.6 Although there is a large sample with 100 patients pre-transplantation surveyed over a period of ten years, was only able to evaluate 64 ct scans of the paranasal sinuses of 100 patients in post-TCTH.6 In contrast, Shaw et al. studied 26 patients and associated changes tomographic pre-transplantation to the development of rhinosinusitis after a transplant.5 the percentage of The worsening of the rhinosinusitis in post-BMT (42%) in patients previously affected was less than that found by Billings et al. ( 66,7%).9 These differences in results can be justified by the age range of the groups evaluated, which were exclusively of the adults in our study and in that of Thompson, and children, in the study of Billings and Shaw. Thompson still justifies this difference by the treatment of the pathologies nasosinusal carried out prior to the TCTH, which was not clarified in the studies of Billings and Shaw. In this study, all the patients were treated prior to the transplant when presented with nasosinusal diseases. Considering that this study is a pilot prospective with the aim of checking the feasibility of the realization of the computerized tomography of paranasal sinuses in all of the candidates for transplantation, it is not necessary for the calculation of sample size. In addition, the literature does not present prospective studies similar to support with the use of CT in the pre-TCTH. It should be noted that the majority of jobs related to stem-cell transplantation hematopoietic cells have small sample size due to the restricted number of transplants. Therefore, a large sampling would only be possible in a work multicenter. In the period in which the patients in this study were evaluated (2003 and 2004), there were 79 transplant of stem cells hematopoietic alogênicos in the Unit of Bone Marrow Transplantation of the blood Center/ HC-UNICAMP. It is estimated an annual average of 40 transplants alogênicos between 2002 and 2004 in this Sector. The lack of association between anatomical variation and the occurrence of rhinosinusitis both before and after the transplant corresponds to the findings in the literature related to chronic rhinosinusitis in patients immunocompetent.14,15 Therefore, the manipulation of surgical patients with anatomic variations, prior to the TCTH, to avoid the occurrence of rhinosinusitis post-transplant would not be indicated. However, it was observed the association of anatomical variation with worsening of the rhinosinusitis in post-TCTH. The increase of the sample may define this association. The realization of the computerized tomography of paranasal sinuses in all patients prior to the TCTH does not seem to be necessary, as there was no significant association between changes tomographic nasosinusal and the occurrence of rhinosinusitis post-transplant. Some authors still advocate the realization of computed tomography of the paranasal sinuses was done to all patients before the transplant, since it demonstrated that the severity of changes tomographic found in the pre-TCTH would be related to the occurrence of rhinosinusitis in post-TCTH.5,9 in This way the indication for computed tomography of paranasal sinuses would be reserved only for applicants for the TCTH with clinical and changes nasosinusal endoscopic compatible with rinossinusopatia. CONCLUSION Despite small sample due to the limited number of transplants, performing ct of paranasal sinuses prior to stem cell transplantation hematopoietic seems to not be necessary in all patients, except when the patient presents with evidence of nasosinusal disease previous. Changes tomographic sinus suggestive of rhinosinusitis in pre-transplant observed in this study may be related to the worsening of the rhinosinusitis in the post-transplant, as well as the anatomical variations of nasosinusal found seem to be associated with the occurrence of rhinosinusitis the most severe in the post-bone marrow transplantation. 