SUMMARY The meeting of the magazine "Evidence-Based Telemedicine - Trauma and Emergency Surgery" (TBE-CITE) conducted a critical review of the literature and selected the three most relevant and actual articles on CT scan indication in pediatric patients with Traumatic brain injury (TBI). The first study identified mild TBI patients with high factors and low risk of presenting intracranial lesions seen on computed tomography (CT) and the need for neurosurgical intervention. The second study evaluated the use of the recommendations of the "National Institute of Clinical Excellence" in pediatric TBI patients and used as outcome variables performing CT or hospitalization. The last article examined and identified patients where the CT scan would be unnecessary and therefore should not be done routinely. Based on this critical literature review and the discussions with experts, the TBE-CITE concluded that it is important to avoid unnecessary exposure of children with mild TBI to ionizing radiation of CT. The group favored the use of the PECARN's  guidelines, where ECG of 14, altered the level of consciousness or skull fracture palpable are CT indications skull, or when the physician's experience, finds multiple or worsening symptoms to occur. Descriptors: Mild craniocerebral trauma; CT scan; neurosurgery; child.     INTRODUCTION Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is one of the most common causes of trauma in children, resulting in high rates of hospitalization and morbidity and mortality significantes1. In the United States of America (USA) 155-180 children per 100,000 people with TBI are seen per year, with 74 to 80% classified as mild TBI (Glasgow Coma Scale [ECG] 13-15) 2. Most pediatric patients with mild TBI may be released after a short period of clinical observation. However, a small percentage of these patients may present neurological deterioration and need for surgical intervention (0.5%) 3.4. Early surgical treatment of intracranial hematomas is critical to a good outcome, with computed tomography (CT) examination of choice for the detection of traumatic intracranial pathologies 4. Indiscriminate indication of CT scan for all pediatric patients with mild TBI generates high costs to the health system and unnecessarily exposes a large number of children to ionizing radiation, tripling the risk of developing leukemia and brain tumors 5,6. Even though there are several algorithms for CT scan indication in patients with mild TBI in adults, in children literature is scarce and controvérsias7,8. To establish criteria for the use of a CT skull in the pediatric TBI is a priority, given the high prevalence of the problem and the indiscriminate use of the CT scan. The participants in the meeting of the magazine "Evidence Based Telemedicine - Trauma and Emergency Surgery" (TBE-CITE) reviewed three multi-center studies on CT indication skull in pediatric patients with mild TBI. Selected articles represent the guidelines followed in Canada, USA and Europe9-11. Based on the literature discussion, recommendations were prepared for TC indication skull in pediatric mild TBI.   STUDY 1 "CATCH: standard for clinical decision for the use of cranial tomography in children with mild TBI" 9 Justification Lack of a recommendation based on evidence for the use of cranial tomography in children with mild TBI that is widely accepted. Question Propose an algorithm to aid in clinical decision making as the performance of CT scan in pediatric patients with mild TBI. Key findings of this study A clinical tool for the decision of the head CT use in children with mild TBI was proposed and based on seven findings, which are divided into high and low risk (Table 1). Patients with at least one of the high-risk factors had a high risk of neurosurgical intervention, with a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 70.2%, leading to head CT indication in 30.2% of patients. The presence of at least one of the top factors or low risk, had a sensitivity of 98.1% and specificity of 50.1% in identifying patients with intracranial lesions detected by CT. This leads to cranial CT indication in 51.9% of patients. Strengths 1 - prospective cohort study with the help of 10 educational institutions in pediatrics, including numerous cases. 2 - The study used a clinical decision algorithm, taking into account a high sensitivity, which allow the doctor to apply it with confidence in cases that really require TC. 3 - The main outcome of the study included not only tomography findings, but also the need for neurosurgery intervention, which, to some extent, compensates the limitation that not all children underwent CT. 4 - Radiological evaluation of CT scan performed by independent radiologists and review by another radiologist or neurosurgeon in doubtful cases. If the question was maintained, the exam was considered normal. 5 - well established inclusion criteria and clinical training of evaluators and image. Limitations 1 - Not all children in the study underwent cranial tomography. Thus, there is no way to know if some children of this group without cranial CT had some asymptomatic intracranial injury. 2 - Some children were excluded, not getting clear why. 3 - The need to validate this tool in clinical practice and evaluate the socio economic impact. 4 - A highly sensitive tool, but with low specificity leading to CT indicated 51.9% of children with mild TBI, despite only 0.5% of patients will require surgical intervention and that only 4-7% will present visible intra-cranial injury. 5 - Small Number of children under 2 years (277), with only 23 cases of brain damage, which limits the generalization and confidence in the results.   STUDY 2 "Implications of the guidelines" National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE) "in the treatment of children with traumatic brain injury" 10 Rationale To evaluate the impact of treatment guidelines from head trauma, proposed by NICE and compare with the guidelines proposed by the "Royal College of Surgeons of England (RCS) ". Question Does NICE guidelines increase the CT indication rate of skull and reduces admissions? Key findings of this study The outcome variables of this study were to carry out a skull radiography (RX), CT skull and hospitalization. The study select patients with high risk factors (Table 2) to CT indication skull, in order to perform the image in these patients and avoid unnecessary hospitalization. When we compare the NICE and RCS protocols, the first showed higher TC indication of the skull and consequent lower hospitalization rates compared to the second. Strengths 1. A relevant study from a public health point of view. The implementation of NICE guidelines have the potential to reduce hospital admissions and by consequence reduce health system spending on patients with TBI. 2. A multi center study with a large sample, which allows more accurate estimates and generalization of the results. 3. The main outcome of the study included not only the performance of X-ray and cranial CT, but also the need for hospital admission, which somehow compensates for the limitation that not all children underwent to radiological examinations. Limitations 1 - The study is a sub analysis of a prospective multi center study, however with a retrospective analysis of the implementation of guidelines and a simulation of the use of the NICE guidelines. 2 - The outcome variables were the needs to perform RX or CT and hospitalization. No reference to the tomographic findings and the presence of intra-cranial injuries or need for neurosurgery treatment. 3 - All children under the age of 16 were included, without a selection of patients with only mild TBI. There were no other exclusion criteria beyond the refusal to participate in the study. 4 - Eleven high risk factors, which makes no practical use.   STUDY 3 "Identification of children at low risk for brain damage after head trauma: a prospective cohort study" 11 Rationale The need for a prospective multi center study to establish standards for head CT indication in children with mild TBI, with separate criteria for population under the age of 2 years old. Question identify factors that select a pediatric population with very low risk for TBI important clinically and do not require investigation with CT. Key findings of this study. Following a prospective evaluation of approximately 42,000 pediatric patients, the use of head CT in 15,000 patients (35.3%) was necessary, and 376 (0.9%) had clinically important TCE (TCEci) and only 60 (0.1%) required a neurosurgical procedure. Standards for two different pediatric populations were proposed: children under 2 years and older (Tables 3, 4 and 5).         Children without any of the risk factors mentioned above were classified as low risk and did not require head CT (< 2 years -53.5%; 2 years or more - 58.3%). The value and the rule of sensitivity were of 100% for the population under 2 years, as for the population aged 2 years or more the negative predictive value was 99.95% and sensitivity was 96 8%. Strengths 1 - We excluded patients with ECG < 14, positive TC risk in 20% of patients and consequent artificial increase in performance. Asymptomatic and with very low risk of injury mechanism patients were excluded. 2 - Multi center study with a large number of patients and prospective. Permiting, also, the analysis of a population of children under the age of 2 years and the creation of a rule for this particular population. 3 - The study establishes an effective and easy to apply algorithm in clinical practice. 4 - The final outcome is the TCEci, which prevents the loss of patients in which CT scan was not sensitive for the diagnosis but clinically TBI brought consequences (concussions). Limitations 1 - The study was conducted in pediatrics referral centers, resulting in the use of a TC lower than the national average, which may not reflect the actual impact of the algorithm in general hospitals. 2 - It was not performed cranial CT in all patients for ethical reasons, which may affect the characteristics of sensitivity, and predictive values of the proposed algorithm. 3 - There was no analysis of the neuro cognitive outcomes in the long term.   CONCLUSIONS Children with mild TBI are, fortunately, the largest portion of patients treated for head trauma and a low incidence of brain injuries, rarely requiring neurosurgery intervention. Thus, the risk of a TCEci against exposure of children to ionizing radiation a CT scan should be considered. The development of guidelines for CT indication skull in the pediatric population (mild TBI) is a priority. The guidelines should be simple and easy to apply. This review included three prospective multicenter studies with proposed guidelines on head CT indication in children with mild TBI, in order to evaluate the proposed algorithms and to propose guidelines that are best adapted to the reality of Brazilian emergency services. The following conclusions were made: 1. Currently, algorithms to guide doctors and family members in the decision to perform CT in children with mild TBI are available and have the great advantage of avoiding unnecessary exposure of children to ionizing radiation of CT. 2. A simple and easy to use algorithm can be used even in non centers, reducing the incidence of cranial CT in a population at low risk for TCEci. 3. Proper use of a guideline can save resources of the health system and avoid exposure to ionizing radiation of a large portion of the pediatric population.   RECOMMENDATIONS The authors believe that the algorithm proposed by PECARN's study (Study 3) is the most robust, objective and simple to use, and validated with a large sample of patients with mild TBI. Therefore, the TBE-CITE group recommends that physicians use this algorithm when there is the decision to perform a CT scan in children with mild TBI. Its use allows an appropriate risk stratification, thus bringing benefits to patients (lower incidence of ionizing radiation) and health care (saving resources).   