 SUMMARY THE meeting of the journal "Telemedicine Evidence-Based Surgery of Trauma and Emergency" (TBE-CiTE) performed a critical review of the literature and selected the three articles most relevant and current on the indication of tomography of the skull in pediatric patients with trauma craniencefálico light (TEC). The first work has identified patients who are victims of TEC rims with factors of high and low risk of experiencing injuries intracranial views to the computed tomography (CT) of the skull and in need of intervention neurosurgical. The second study assessed the use of the recommendations of the National Institute of Clinical Excellence" in pediatric patients with TCE, and used as variables of the outcome of the realization of TC or hospitalization. The last article analysed and identified the patients where the CT of the skull would be unnecessary and, therefore, should not be done routinely. Based on this critical review of the literature and discussion with experts, the TBE-CiTE concluded that it is important to avoid the unnecessary exposure of children with TEC rims to the ionizing radiation of CT scan of the skull. The group favored the use of the guideline of the PECARN where the ECG 14, change in level of consciousness or fracture of the skull palpable are indications of CT of the skull, or when the doctor's experience, findings, multiple, or worsening of symptoms occur. Descriptors: Trauma cranioencefálico light; tomography of the skull; neurosurgery; child. INTRODUCTION THE trauma cranioencefálico (TEC) is one of the most common causes of trauma in children, resulting in high rate of hospitalization and morbidity and mortality significantes1. In the United States of America (USA) 155 to 180 children per 100,000 with TEC are met for the year, being 74% and 80% classified as TEC rims (the Glasgow Coma Scale [ECG] 13 - 15)2. The majority of pediatric patients with TEC rims can be released after a brief period of clinical observation. However, a small portion of these patients can exhibit neurological deterioration and need for surgical intervention (0.5%)and 3,4. The surgical treatment, early detection of hematomas intracranial-is fundamental to a good evolution, being the computed tomography (CT) of the skull the examination of choice for the detection of pathologies of intracranial traumáticas4. The indication of indiscriminate CT of the skull for all pediatric patients presenting with TEC light generates high costs to the health care system and exposes it to unnecessarily a large number of children to ionizing radiation, tripling the risk of developing leukemia and tumors cerebrais5,6. Although there are several algorithms for the indication of CT of the skull in patients with TEC rims in the adult population, in the pediatric population, the literature is scarce and with controvérsias7,8. Establish criteria for use of CT of the skull in the TEC in the paediatric population is a priority, given the high prevalence of the problem and the use indiscrimando tomography of the skull. The participants of the meeting of the journal "Telemedicine Evidence-Based Surgery of Trauma and Emergency" (TBE-CiTE) reviewed three multicenter studies published on the indication for CT of the skull in pediatric patients with TEC rims. The articles selected represent the guidelines followed in Canada, USA and Europa9-11. Based on the discussion of the relevant literature, recommendations have been drawn up for the reporting of CT of the skull in the TEC rims in the paediatric population. STUDY 1 "the CATCH: a standard for clinical decision-making for the use of tomography of the skull in children with TEC light." 9 Justification the Lack of a recommendation, based on evidence, for the use of CT of the skull in children with TEC light that is widely accepted. Question Propose an algorithm to aid in clinical decision-making as well as holding TC of the skull in pediatric patients with TEC rims. The main findings of this study, A tool clinic for the decision to use CT of the skull in children with TEC light has been proposed, based on seven findings, which are divided into high and low risk (Table 1). Patients with at least one of the high-risk factors presented a high risk of intervention, neurosurgical, with a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 70.2%, leading to the indication for CT of skull at 30.2% of the patients. The presence of at least one of the factors of high risk or low risk, showed a sensitivity of 98.1% and a specificity of 50.1% in the identification of patients with injury, intracranial detected with CT of the skull. This leads to the indication for CT of the skull in 51,9% of patients. Strengths 1 - the prospective Study cohort with the collaboration of 10 institutions of education in pediatrics, including a large number of cases. 2 – The study used a decision-making algorithm for clinical evaluation, taking into account a high sensitivity, which allow the doctor to apply it with confidence in the cases that really need the TC. 3 - The outcome of the main study included not only the findings of the ct scan, but also the need for intervention neurosurgical, which somehow compensates for the limitation that not all children performed the CT scan. 4 - Evaluation the radiological CT scan of the skull performed by a radiologist independent and review by another radiologist or neurosurgeon in doubtful cases. If the question was maintained, the examination was considered normal. 5 - inclusion Criteria well-established and training of assessors in clinical and image. Limitations 1 - Not all children who participated in the study were submitted to CT of the skull. Thus, there is no way to know if some of the children in this group without CT of the skull had some form of intracranial injury asymptomatic. 2 - Some children were excluded from the study, it is not getting clear as to why. 3 - Need to validate this tool in clinical practice and assess the impact of socio economic. 4 - A tool with a high sensitivity, but low specificity leading to the indication of TC in 51,9% of the children with TEC rims, despite only 0.5% of patients will require surgical intervention, and that only 4% to 7% will present intracranial injury visible. 5 - small Number of children under 2 years of age (277), with only 23 cases of brain injury, which limits the generalization, and confidence in the results. STUDY 2, "Implications of the guidelines "the National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE)" in the treatment of children with trauma craniencefálico" 10 Justification to Assess the impact of guidelines on treatment of head trauma, as proposed by the NICE and compare with the guidelines proposed by the Royal College of Surgeons of England (RCS)". Question guidelines NICE increase the rate of indication for CT of the skull and reduces admissions? The main findings of this study outcome variables in this study were conducting radiography (RX) of the skull, CT of the skull, and hospitalization. The study selects patients with high-risk factors (Table 2) for indication of the TC of the skull, in order to accomplish the image in these patients and avoid a hospital stay unnecessary. When compared to the protocols NICE and RCS, the first presented a greater indication of the TC of the skull and consequent lower rate of hospitalization when compared to the second. Strengths 1. Study quite relevant from the point of view of public health. The implementation of the guidelines NICE has the potential to reduce hospital admissions and consequently reduce costs to the health system with patients with TEC. 2. Multicenter study with a large sampling, which allows for more accurate estimates and generalization of the results. 3. The outcome of the main study included not only the realization of X-ray of skull and CT, but also the need of hospital admission, which in a way compensates for the limitation that not all children underwent radiological examination. Limitations 1 - The study is a sub analysis of a prospective multi-center study, however with a retrospective analysis of the application of the guidelines and a simulation of the use of the guidelines NICE. 2 - outcome variables were the need for carrying out RX or CT of the skull and the need of hospitalization. Without reference to the findings of ct and presence of lesions intracranial or need for a neurosurgical treatment. 3 - Included all children under the age of 16 years, without selection of patients only with the TEC rims. There were no other exclusion criteria in addition to the refusal to participate in the study. 4 - the Eleven high-risk factors, which makes the use not practical. STUDY 3 'the Identification of children with low risk for brain injuries after trauma of the skull: a prospective study cohort" 11 Justification for the Need of a prospective multicenter study to establish standards for the indication for CT of the skull in children with TEC rims, with separate criteria for the population with age less than 2 years of age. Question to Identify the factors that select a pediatric population very low risk for TCE clinically important and do not require investigation with CT scan of the skull. The main findings of this study After a prospective assessment of approximately 42,000 pediatric patients, it was necessary to use CT of the skull in 15,000 patients (35,3%), and 376 (0,9%) presented TEC clinically important (TCEci) and only 60 (0,1%) needed some microsurgical procedure. Proposed standards for two paediatric populations distinct: under 2 years of age and older than 2 years (Tables 3, 4 and 5). Children without any of the risk factors cited above were classified as low risk and did not require CT of the skull (< 2 years -53,5%; 2 years or more about - 58,3%). For the population under 2 years of age, the negative predictive value and sensitivity of the rule were 100%, whereas for the population aged 2 years or higher the negative predictive value was 99.95% and the sensitivity was of 96.8%. Strengths 1 - we excluded patients with ECG < 14, the risk of TC positive in 20% of patients, and the consequent artificial increase of performance. Excluded were patients without symptoms and with a mechanism of injury very low risk. 2 - multi-center Study, with a large number of patients and prospective. Allowing even the analysis of a population of children with age less than 2 years and the creation of a standard for this specific population. 3 - The study establishes an algorithm effective and easy applicability in clinical practice. 4 - The final outcome is the TCEci, which prevents the loss of patients in which CT scan of the skull was not sensitive for diagnosis, but clinically the TEC has brought impact (concussions). Limitations 1 - The study was carried out in centres of reference in paediatric, resulting in a use of TC lower than the national average, which may not reflect the actual impact of the algorithm in general hospitals. 2 - has Not been performed, CT of the skull in all patients for ethical reasons, which may affect the characteristics of sensitivity and predictive values of the proposed algorithm. 3 - they have Not analysed the outcomes and neuro-cognitive in the long term. CONCLUSIONS Children with TEC rims are, fortunately, the greater part of the patients of head trauma and have a low incidence of lesions in the brain, rarely requiring intervention neurocúrgica. Thus, the risk of a TCEci against the exposure of the child to ionizing radiation of CT must be weighed. The development of guidelines for the indication for CT of the skull in the pediatric population (TEC light) is a priority. The guidelines must be simple and easy to apply. This review included three studies multicentre prospective with proposed guidelines on the indication for CT of the skull in children who are victims of TEC rims, with the aim of evaluating the proposed algorithms and to propose guidelines that best fit the reality of the emergency services brazilian. The following conclusions were made: 1. Currently, algorithms to guide doctors and family members in the decision to perform CT in children with TEC rims are available and have the great advantage of avoiding the unnecessary exposure of children to ionizing radiation of CT. 2. A simple algorithm and easy application can be used even in centers not specialized, reducing the incidence of CT of the skull in a low-risk population to TCEci. 3. The proper use of a guideline can save health system resources and to avoid the ionizing radiation exposure of a large portion of the pediatric population. RECOMMENDATIONS The authors believe that the algorithm proposed by the study in PECARN (Study 3) is the most robust, objective and easy-to-use, in addition to validated with a large sampling of patients with TEC rims. Therefore, the group TBE-CiTE recommends that doctors use this algorithm when the decision to perform a CT scan in children with TEC rims. Its use allows for a stratification of appropriate risk, thereby bringing benefits to patients (lower incidence of ionizing radiation) and the health care system (economy of resources). 