ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Coronary angiography has been indicated preoperatively to heart valve disease > 35 years. However, the actual prevalence of coronary artery disease (CAD) obstructive in this population has been little studied. To evaluate the prevalence and risk factors for CAD candidates for valve surgery in Brazil. METHODS: Coronary angiography was performed in 3,736 patients eligible for valve surgery and evaluated the prevalence and risk factors for CAD associated with valvular heart disease. RESULTS: CAD was associated with valvular heart disease in 121 patients (3.42% prevalence). In 79 (68.1%), the diagnosis of CAD was done only by preoperative coronary angiography. Of these 79, 50 (63.3%) had isolated aortic valve or mitral associated aortic valve disease. Smoking was observed in 54 patients (68.3%), hypertension in four (43%), family history in 24 (30.3%), diabetes mellitus in 15 (18.9%) and obesity in eight (10, 1%). Age > 50 years was observed in 95.7% of 121 patients. Only five patients (4.3% of patients with CHD) were aged < 50 years, and all of them had at least one risk factor for CAD. CONCLUSION: The prevalence of CAD was lower in the patients studied. Aortic valve disease was the most common associated with CAD, and most patients were aged > 50 years. The ideal age for routine preoperative coronary angiography in patients with valvular heart disease should be reevaluated. Keywords: Coronary angiography, preoperative care, heart valve diseases, coronary arteriosclerosis.     Introduction Preoperative coronary angiography has been indicated routine from 35 years old in patients with valvular heart disease patients who need to undergo cirurgia1.Entretanto, the actual prevalence of coronary artery disease (CAD) in these patients was little studied2,3. The association between CAD and valvular heart disease usually worsens the symptoms, prognosis, and increases surgical risk, especially in patients with stenosis aórtica4. The prevalence of CAD in valvular heart disease is very volatile and may be influenced by the degree of local development, social conditions and nutritional habits of the population evaluated. Therefore, the indication of preoperative coronary angiography could be adjusted according to the actual prevalence of obstructive CAD. In the United States, coronary angiography is indicated before 35 years of age, even in patients with no clinical history or risk factors for CAD. In other countries, such as Spain, coronary angiography has been performed around the age of 60 in men and 65 for women, due to the low prevalence, less than 5% of CAD in individuals under 60 years of age3. To assess the prevalence of significant CAD in patients with valvular heart disease, we studied all preoperative coronary angiographies performed during a period of ten years in our institution.   Methods January 1990 to December 2000, 3,736 patients with valvular heart disease were operated on at our institution. We evaluated the medical records of all patients undergoing heart valve surgery and coronary artery bypass grafting. If necessary, some incomplete data, such as the presence of risk factors have been clarified with subsequent telephone contact. Patients with known ischemic mitral insufficiency were excluded. significant CAD was defined as an obstruction of at least 70% of one of the coronary arteries. An obstruction equal to or greater than 50% of the left coronary trunk was also considered significant. The study was submitted to the Ethics Committee and was duly approved. Patients with significant CAD were divided into two groups: previous CAD, referring to patients with known coronary artery disease; and new DAC, referring to patients in whom the diagnosis of coronary artery disease was possible only after completion of preoperative angiography. The following parameters were evaluated: 1) sex and age; 2) type of valve disease; 3) Risk factors for CAD including: tabagismo5 (asked if she smoked and the number of cigarettes per day, and was a former smoker), obesity (defined as a body mass index greater than 30 kg / m2), dyslipidemia (serum total cholesterol greater than 200 mg / dL or lipoproteins low higher density than 130 mg / dL), family history of DAC6 (defined as the presence of sudden death or acute myocardial infarction in ascending before 55 and 65 years old, respectively, for males and females), hypertension (defined as blood pressure greater than 140/90 mmHg) and carrying the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus (defined at the time of the start of the study and maintained throughout that as glucose fasting above 140 mg / dL). Statistical analysis was performed by SAS software and was considered statistically significant a value of p < 0.05. Quantitative variables for means and standard deviations were used. Student t test paired and unpaired were used when appropriate. For qualitative data (eg, presence of hypertension or not, the presence of the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus or not) when compared to the hypothesis of equivalence ratios was used chi-square test or, when limited, the Fisher exact test.   Results The association between CAD and significant valvular heart disease occurred in 121 patients among the 3,736 individuals who were operated, resulting in a prevalence of 3.24%. Of these 3,736 patients, there were 1,905 (51%) with mitral valve disease, 1,196 (32%) with aortic and 635 (17%) with mitral and aortic valve disease. Among the 3,736 cases, there were 3,615 patients with nonobstructive CAD (Table 1). Association between CAD and valvular heart disease was more frequent in patients with isolated or combined aortic disease with mitral disease (3.94%) than in patients with isolated mitral valve disease (2.26%).     Of the 121 patients with CAD, we retrieve complete data of 109 (Fig.1). 30 patients had prior information of CAD ( "previous CAD"). However, in 79 (72.5%) the diagnosis of CAD was possible only because of routine preoperative coronary angiography ( "new DAC"). Data from 30 patients with "previous CAD" and 79 patients with "new DAC", including the number of risk factors is detailed in Table 2. Among the 79 patients with new DAC, 55 were male (69.62%), with an average age of 64.74 ± 9.23 years old. There were 50 patients with isolated aortic or mitral-aortic valve disease, and 29 with isolated mitral valve disease. There was no significant difference between the mean age, diagnosis of diabetes mellitus or hypertension comparing the previous CAD groups and new CAD (p = ns) (Table 2). In addition, the symptoms of angina pectoris in previous CAD group were more frequent than in the new CAD group (p < 0.001). In the new DAC group, the following risk factors were observed: smoking in 54 patients, the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in 15, and obesity (body mass index > 30 kg / m2) in eight. Hypertension was recognized in 34 patients and family history, 24. Only five patients (4.6% of all patients with CAD and 0.13% of the carrier valvular population) were less than 50 years of age. All of these patients (one mitral, aortic two and two mitroaortic) had at least one risk factor for CAD. Of these, three were female and two male; all were smokers; two had family history, two had hypertension; An diabetes; and, dyslipidemia.   Discussion The prevalence of CAD has not been extensively studied, particularly in patients assintomáticos2,7. Enriquez-Sarano et al 2 evaluated valve disease carriers from the United States and identified about 35% of them with associated CAD without significant changes over a ten-year follow-up. Recent data have shown that DAC comprises more than half of all cardiovascular events in men and women over 75 years in the United States8, and the lifetime risk of developing CHD after age 40 is 49% for men and 32 mulheres.A% for hypertension was a risk factor, particularly in women negras8. Our data showed a prevalence about ten times lower (3.42%). Other studies showed variable frequency depending on the population tested. Thus, San Jose et al 3 demonstrated a prevalence of 20.3% in a Spanish study of 234 patients with a mean age of 64 ± 10 years old. Timmermans et al 9 identified lower prevalence of CAD (about 14%) in Belgian with aortic insufficiency. Research in developing countries show a prevalence of about 5% to 15% 10. These differences are due to advanced age, risk factors and nutritional habits among the various populations. Our study showed a very low incidence of coronary artery disease, ie that there was need for revascularization. Rheumatic fever is still a common disease in our country, with the mitral valve most frequently affected. The absolute sample of patients with mitral valve disease was high, including its association with CAD. However, when assessed in proportion, we observed a higher frequency of association between aortic stenosis and CAD, around 10%, which is similar to findings in other studies11,12. The highest age and the male predominance may explain these findings. In addition, a large number of risk factors - especially dyslipidaemia, our data were not conclusive (only 35% of the patients with significant CAD had data on cholesterol levels before your heart valve surgery, and of these 70% had levels high total cholesterol) - could also explain this association. Preoperative coronary angiography is commonly performed in patients with valvular heart disease over 35 years of age in the United States1, especially if there are risk factors for CAD. Non-invasive evaluation techniques such as electrocardiography, chest radiography, Doppler echocardiography, scintigraphy and more recently angiography, combined with clinical examination, can elucidate, in most cases, the etiology, the degree of valve damage and if there is dysfunction ventricular. In only 10% of patients with heart valve hemodynamic study has paper diagnóstico11-15. Furthermore, there is a high cost and the inherent risk of an invasive procedure, such as vascular injury by catheter insertion, anaphylactic shock and / or renal dysfunction iodinated contrast and even episode embolism stroke by calcium or trombo13. The catheterization only for CAD evaluation may be more restricted. Differences in the prevalence of CAD in different populations should be considered when the question coronary angiography as a preoperative examination, especially in younger patients with heart valve disease. Non-invasive tests such as exercise stress test and myocardial scintigraphy have been used in selected patients in order to avoid angiocoronariografia14,15. More recently, coronariana16 angiography has demonstrated higher coronary calcium index average age of populations higher than those assessed valve disease in this study (43.1 ± 18.3). However, data were discordant to show the presence or absence of obstructive CAD. The presence of risk factors seems to be a good indication for performing pre-operatória17,18 coronary angiography. Our data showed that angina was the most frequent data found in previous CAD group, showing the importance of clinical history in these pacientes19,20. The absence of risk factors is an important marker to exclude obstructive CAD in patients under 50 years of age. In fact, we found no patients under 50 years of age and with no risk factor for CAD, with valve disease associated with CAD. Considered as a limitation the fact that a retrospective study. Thus, data on dyslipidemia and development details may have been omitted. However, these limitations do not invalidate the study, they emphasize the need to evaluate the most appropriate age for preoperative coronary angiography.   Conclusion In our institution, we identified low prevalence of obstructive coronary disease in patients with valvular heart disease with surgical indication. Aortic valve disease was the most common associated with CAD and most patients were aged > 50 years. The ideal age for routine preoperative coronary angiography in patients with valvular heart disease should be reevaluated. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   