 SUMMARY background: coronary angiography has been indicated in the pre-operative to valvopatas >35 years. However, the actual prevalence of coronary artery disease (cad) and obstructive in this population has been little studied. OBJECTIVE: to Evaluate the prevalence of and risk factors for cad in candidates for valve surgery in Brazil. METHODS: we performed angiocoronariografia in 3.736 patients candidates for valve surgery, and evaluated the prevalence and risk factors for cad associated with valvular heart disease. RESULTS: THE DAC has been associated with valvular heart disease in 121 patients (prevalence 3,42%). In 79 (68,1%), the diagnosis of the IPC has been made only by angiography in the preoperative period. Among these 79, 50 (63,3%) had valvular heart disease aortic isolated or valvular heart disease aortic associated with mitral. Smoking was seen in 54 patients (68,3%), hypertension in four (43%), family history in 24 (30.3 percent), diabetes mellitus in 15 (18,9%), and obesity in eight (10.1 percent). Age >50 years was observed in a 95.7% of the 121 patients. Only five (4.3 percent of patients with cad) were aged <50 years, and all of these had at least one risk factor for cad. CONCLUSION: THE prevalence of DAC was lower in the patients studied. The valve of the aorta was the most frequent associated with the DAC, and the majority of patients had age >50 years. The ideal age for the completion of coronary angiography pre-operative routine in patients with valvular heart disease should be reevaluated. Key words: coronary Angiography, pre-operative, diseases of the valves, cardiac, coronary atherosclerosis. Introduction coronary Angiography in the preoperative period has been indicated as a routine from 35 years of age in patients with valvular heart disease that need to be submitted to cirurgia1.However, the actual prevalence of coronary artery disease (cad) in these patients was little estudada2,3. The association between cad and valvular heart disease usually worsens the symptoms, prognosis, and increases the surgical risk, especially in patients with stenosis aórtica4. The prevalence of DAC in the valve is very fickle and can be influenced by the degree of local development, social conditions and nutritional habits of the population evaluated. Therefore, the indication of angiography in the preoperative period could be modified according to the actual prevalence of DAC obstructive. In the United States, coronary angiography is indicated before 35 years of age, even in patients without history of clinical, or risk factors for cad. In other countries, as in Spain, the coronary angiography has been performed around the age of 60 in men and 65 years for women, on the grounds of low prevalence, less than 5%, of chd in individuals below 60 years of idade3. To assess the prevalence of DAC-significant in patients with valvular heart disease, study all the coronariografias pre-operative carried out during a period of ten years at our institution. Methods From January 1990 to December 2000, 3.736 patients with valvular heart disease were operated in our institution. We evaluated the medical records of all patients undergoing valve surgery and coronary artery bypass grafting. If needed, some incomplete data, such as the presence of risk factors, have been clarified with a telephone contact later. Patients with mitral regurgitation ischemic known were excluded. DAC-significant was defined as an obstruction of at least 70% of one of the coronary arteries. An obstruction equal to or greater than 50% of the trunk coronary left was also considered to be significant. The work was submitted to the Ethics Committee of the institution and was duly approved. The cad patients significant were divided into two groups: DAC prior, referring to patients with coronary artery disease known; and DAC new, referring to patients in which the diagnosis of coronary artery disease was possible only after completion of angiography in the preoperative period. The following parameters were evaluated: 1) sex and age; 2) type of valvular heart disease; 3) risk factors for cad including: tabagismo5 (asked if they smoked and the number of cigarettes per day, and if it was an ex-smoker), obesity (defined as body mass index greater than 30 kg/m2), dyslipidemia (serum total cholesterol greater than 200 mg/dL or low-density lipoprotein greater than 130 mg/dL), family history for DAC6 (defined as the presence of sudden death or acute myocardial infarction in ascending before 55 and 65 years of age, respectively, for males and females), hypertension (defined as blood pressure greater than 140x90 mmHg) and patients with a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus (defined at the time of the start of the study and maintained along such as fasting blood glucose above 140 mg/dL). The statistical analysis was performed in SAS software and was considered to be statistically significant a value of p<0.05. Were used quantitative variables to averages and standard deviations. Tests Student's t-paired and non-paired were used when appropriate. For qualitative data (for example, the presence of hypertension or not, the presence of the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus or not), when compared to the hypothesis of equivalence of proportions, we used Chi-square test or, when limited, the exact test of Fischer. Results The association between DAC and significant valvular heart disease occurred in 121 patients between the 3.736 individuals who were operated on, resulting in a prevalence of 3,24%. These 3.736 patients, there were 1.905 (51%) with mitral valve disease, 1.196 (32%) with aortic and 635 (17%) with valvular heart disease mitro-aortic. Between the 3.736 cases, there was 3.615 patients with cad non-obstructive (tab.1). The association between cad and valvular heart disease was more frequent in patients with disease of the aorta alone or combined with mitral disease (3,94%) than in patients with mitral valve disease isolated (2,26%). Of the 121 patients with cad, we have recovered complete data of 109 (fig. 1). In the 30 patients had prior information of DAC ("DAC prior"). However, in 79 (72,5%) the diagnosis of DAC was only possible on the basis of coronary angiography pre-operative routine ("DAC news"). The data of 30 patients with "DAC-pre" and of the 79 patients with "DAC news," including the number of risk factors, are detailed in table 2. Among the 79 patients with cad new, 55 were male (69,62%), with an average age of 64,74±9,23 years of age. There were 50 patients with valvular heart disease aortic isolated or mitro-aortic valves, and 29 with mitral valve disease isolated. There was no significant difference between the mean age, diagnosis of diabetes mellitus or hypertension, by comparing the groups to the DAC prior and DAC new (p = ns) (tab.2). In addition, the symptoms of angina pectoris in the group DAC prior were more frequent than in group IPC (p<0.001). In the group DAC new, the following risk factors were observed: smoking in 54 patients, the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in 15, and obesity (body mass index >30 kg/m2) in eight. Hypertension was recognized in 34 patients and family history, at 24. Only five patients (4,6% of all patients with chd and 0.13% of the entire population carrier of valvular heart disease) were less than 50 years of age. All of these patients (one mitral, two aortic and two mitro-aortic) had at least one risk factor for cad. Of these, three were female and two male; all were smokers; two had a family history, two had hypertension; diabetes; and dyslipidemia. Discussion The prevalence of the IPC has not been studied extensively, particularly in patients assintomáticos2,7. Enriquez-Sarano and colleagues.2 evaluated carriers of valvular heart disease from the United States, and have identified about 35% of those with chd associated with, without significant changes along the follow-up of ten years. Recent data have shown that DAC comprises more than half of all cardiovascular events in men and women above 75 years in the United Unidos8, and the risk during the life of developing DAC after the age of 40 years is 49% for men and 32% for women.Hypertension was a risk factor, particularly in women negras8. Our data showed a prevalence of about ten times lower (3,42%). Other studies showed variable frequency depending on the population evaluated. In this way, San Jose, and cols.3 have shown a prevalence of 20.3% in a Spanish study with 234 patients with a mean age of 64±10 years of age. Timmermans and cols.9 have identified a lower prevalence of CAD (about 14%) in belgian with aortic insufficiency. Research in developing countries show a prevalence of around 5% to 15%10. These differences are due to greater age, risk factors and nutritional habits among various populations. Our study showed a very low incidence of coronary heart disease obstructive, or is, in that there was a need for revascularization. Rheumatic fever is still a common disease in our country, and the mitral valve most often affected. The sample absolute of patients with mitral valve disease was high, including its association with DAC. However, when assessed in proportion, we observed a higher frequency of association between aortic stenosis and DAC, around 10%, which is similar to findings in other estudos11,12. The age group most high, and the predominance of males may explain these findings. In addition, a high number of risk factors especially dyslipidemia, in which our data were not conclusive (only 35% of our cad patients significant had data on levels of cholesterol prior to his valve surgery and, of these, 70% had elevated levels of total cholesterol) - could also explain this association. Angiocoronariografia pre-surgery is commonly performed in patients with valvular heart disease above the age of 35 in the United Unidos1, especially if there are risk factors for cad. Valuation techniques non-invasive such as electrocardiography, chest radiography, echocardiography Doppler, scintigraphy and, more recently, angiotomografia, combined with clinical examination, can elucidate, in the majority of cases, the etiology, the degree of injury to the valve and if there is ventricular dysfunction. In only 10% of the patients with valvular heart disease hemodynamic studies have paper diagnóstico11-15. In addition, there is a high cost and the inherent risk of an invasive procedure, such as vascular lesion for catheter insertion, anaphylactic shock and/or renal dysfunction by iodinated contrast and even the episode of stroke and cerebral embolism lime or trombo13. Catheterization only for evaluation of the DAC can be more restricted. Differences in the prevalence for cad in various populations should be considered when we question the angiocoronariografia as an examination pre-operatively, especially in patients more young people with valvular heart disease. Noninvasive tests such as exercise testing and myocardial scintigraphy, have been used in selected patients with the goal of preventing the angiocoronariografia14,15. More recently, the angiotomografia coronariana16 has demonstrated a greater index of coronary calcium in populations of average age higher than the valvopatas evaluated in this study (43.1 per±18,3). However, the data were discordant to show the presence or not of DAC obstructive. The presence of risk factors seems to be a good indication for performing coronary angiography pre-operatória17,18. Our data showed that angina pectoris was the most frequent found in the group DAC the prior, denoting the importance of the clinical history these pacientes19,20. The absence of risk factors is an important marker for delete DAC obstructive in patients less than 50 years of age. In fact, we did not find any patient less than 50 years of age and without any risk factor for the DAC, with the DAC associated with valvular heart disease. We consider as a limitation the fact of being a retrospective study. Thus, data on dyslipidemia and the details of the evolution may have been omitted. However, these limitations do not invalidate the study, because they emphasize the need for reassessment of the age most suitable for the realization of coronary angiography pre-operative. Conclusion In our institution, we identified a low prevalence of coronary heart disease obstructive in patients with valvular heart disease with surgical indication. The valve of the aorta was the most frequent associated with the DAC, and the majority of patients had age >50 years. The ideal age for the completion of coronary angiography pre-operative routine in patients with valvular heart disease should be reevaluated. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 