OBJECTIVE: To compare HRCT findings in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) chronically colonized with Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Staphylococcus aureus, using the Bhalla score modified, and evaluate the intraobserver and interobserver reliabilities of the method. METHODS: A retrospective cross-sectional study including 41 patients with CF, 26 of which chronically colonized with P. aeruginosa (Pa group) and 15 S. aureus (Sa group). Two radiologists independently analyzed on two occasions, the HRCT images of patients and applied the modified Bhalla score. Intra- and interobserver reliabilities were evaluated according to the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). RESULTS: There was good intraobserver and interobserver agreement (ICC > 0.8). The results of the Pa group scores were higher than those of the Sa group for observer 1 (mean of 13.50 ± 3.90 and median 13.5 vs. average of 5.0 ± 5.28 and median of 3 , 0) and the second observer (average of 11.96 ± 5.07 and median 12.0 vs. average of 5.07 ± 5.65 and median 5.0). CT findings, such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, formation of mucous plugs, commitment of generations of bronchial divisions and pattern of mosaic attenuation were more prevalent in the group colonized by P. aeruginosa. CONCLUSIONS: Bhalla score modified proved reproducible and reliable for the evaluation of HRCT and allowed the differentiation between patients included in both groups. Higher scores in the Pa group showed increased lung structural impairment in this group. Key words: Cystic fibrosis; Tomography; Staphylococcus aureus; Pseudomonas aeruginosa.     Introduction In cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic bacterial infection is responsible for lung structural damage and progressive respiratory distress, and respiratory failure accounts for 95% of deaths in patients with CF.(1) Bacterial infections are established early in these patients and are associated with a limited number of microorganisms. Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae are associated with infections in younger patients. Subsequently, Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonizing the respiratory tract, and with the course of the disease shall produce a polysaccharide polymer called alginate, featuring the mucoid phenotype, which confers greater resistance to the action of antibiotics. Chronic infection with P. aeruginosa has been clearly associated with the decline in lung function, worsening of structural damage, higher morbidity and increased mortality in CF patients.(2) The fight infection and progressive lung disease has been the ultimate goal of monitoring and treatment strategies for these patients.(1) To evaluate respiratory impairment, it has been recommended a set of diagnostic procedures, including cultures of respiratory secretions, respiratory function tests and radiographic chest images.(1) The respiratory function test and chest X-ray are indirect measurements of lung structure and are less sensitive to localized or early lesions.(3) Chest HRCT is considered a specific method of image early to assess the involvement of the pulmonary parenchyma and the proximal and distal airways (bronchial wall thickening, bronchiectasis, mucoid impaction, and lung hyperinflation).(4) The CT findings can be scored through reproducible scores.(3) Some studies indicate magnetic resonance imaging of the chest as an imaging method promising for the detection of lung abnormalities in CF; however, there is still no defined protocol for use of this method in FC.(5) This study aimed to compare the HRCT changes in CF patients chronically colonized with P. aeruginosa or S. aureus, using a score system.   Methods The study design was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Instituto Fernandes Figueira (CAAE 0042.0.008.000-07). This was a retrospective cross-sectional study with CF patients with patients from the Department of Pediatrics Pulmonology Department of Fernandes Figueira Institute (Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Ministry of Health), reference center for CF (children and adolescents) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, during the period between January 2007 and June 2008. Inclusion criteria for this study were as follows: fill CF diagnostic criteria (6); be receiving regular clinical and laboratory at the Pulmonology Clinic of Fernandes Figueira Institute, including the collection and subsequent culture of respiratory secretions in the scheduled consultations; and have been subjected to examination of chest HRCT according to the indication and the care planning team in time to clinical stability, ie, in the absence of clinical criteria for respiratory exacerbation, such as increased cough or secretion, change aspect secretion, weight loss and loss of appetite.(7) The patients selected for inclusion in the study were divided into two groups formed according to the result of microbiological examination of respiratory secretions: Sa group consisting of patients with respiratory secretion S. aureus, but they had never been colonized by P . aeruginosa or whose secretion cultures were negative for P. aeruginosa in the last 12 months; and Pa group consisting of patients who met criteria for chronic colonization with P. aeruginosa (more than 50% of the positive cultures for P. aeruginosa) and who had no other pathogenic bacteria in respiratory secretions for over 12 months. From the hospital records of the patients included were collected demographic and clinical data. Respiratory secretions were processed according to specific and standardized protocols for the monitoring of CF patients.(8) The microorganisms were initially identified by phenotypic methods and additionally, where appropriate, by molecular techniques, using PCR and sequencing of the recA gene and 16S rDNA gene in Gram Negative Laboratory not fermenters Microbiology Discipline State University from Rio de Janeiro.(9) Patients included in this study underwent radiological assessments as routine referral center, which consists of tomographic reviews, with an interval of at least two years when the patient is stable respiratory standpoint. All HRCT were performed without sedation using the ProSpeed-STM apparatus (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI, USA) with 1 mm thick and 10 mm intervals cuts, with parameters of 80 to 100 mA / s and 120 kV ; the images were shot with window 1,500 UH and level of -700 HU, according agreement with the radiology department of the institution. For the present study, HRCT which had a date subsequent to bacterial colonization by the microorganism from each group were used, and images were selected according to the inclusion criteria and subjected to a first evaluation by two pediatric radiologists over 10 years experience. The abnormalities were defined and adopted in accordance with the criteria of the Fleischner Society (10) and the Brazilian Illustrated Consensus of terms and fundamental patterns in chest CT scans (11) (Figure 1). Thereafter, every observer evaluated the images independently and blinded for clinical and laboratory data, applying said score for each exam. This process was repeated by the same observers after an average period of three months. The score was adopted the modified Bhalla, (12) whose changes and their parameters for analysis are described in Table 1. The patient's total score was obtained as the sum of scores in relation to severity and / or extent of each morphological changes. This value can range from zero (indicating no abnormalities) to 37 (indicating major changes in all parameters). The intraobserver and interobserver reliability (the first evaluation data) for each item score was assessed using the kappa coefficient, and values respected the following interpretation regarding the agreement: low ( < 0.20); reasonable (0.21 to 0.40); moderate (0.41 to 0.60); good (0.61 to 0.80) and very good ( > 0.81).(13,14) The degree of agreement between observers in both assessments was measured according to the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Intra- and interobserver reliabilities were also assessed by Bland & Altman.(15) The comparison of the score results in both groups of patients included in the study was made from an assessment of descriptive statistics score by evaluator microbiological groups. Statistical analyzes were performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 12.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The results were compared and statistical significance was assessed by the Mann-Whitney test, adopting p < 0.05 as indicative of statistical significance. Neuroimaging abnormalities found were also evaluated for frequency of appearance. Each onthe was defined as present only if the two observers agreed that the score was not zero. If one understands that the score was zero, the change was considered missing. Subsequently, the results were compared between the two groups in question, and statistical significance was assessed using the chi-square test, considering p < 0.05 as statistically significant.   Results According to the inclusion criteria, were selected 41 patients, 15 allocated in the Sa group and 26 allocated in the Pa group (Figure 2). Demographic and microbiological characteristics of the study population are shown in Table 1. The intraobserver reliability assessed by the JRC, was 0.824 and 0.892 for the first and second observers respectively, showing a good correlation between the two assessments. By graphical analysis of Bland & Altman, we found that the difference between the two time points did not increase as the score of the score increased. The interobserver reliability for the total score, as measured by the JRC, was 0.814, indicating a good correlation between the observers. The graphical analysis of Bland & Altman has confirmed this correlation and showed that the difference between the two observers did not increase as the score score increased. Table 2 describes the results of intra- and interobserver reliability for each parameter alone and for the total score. The comparison of the scores obtained for each group of patients showed that the results of the Pa group scores were higher than those of the Sa group for observer 1 (mean of 13.50 ± 3.90 and median 13.5 vs. mean of 5.0 ± 5.28 and median 3.0) and the second observer (mean 11.96 ± 5.07 mean and median 12.0 vs. 5.07 ± 5.65; median 5.0), with statistical significance (p < 0.001). CT findings, such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, formation of mucous plugs, commitment of generations of bronchial divisions and pattern of mosaic attenuation were more prevalent in the Pa group than in the Sa group, with statistical significance (p < 0, 05). air trapping and acinar nodules were more prevalent in the Pa group, and collapse / consolidation was more prevalent in Sa group; However, these results were not statistically significant (p > 0.05).   Discussion Since the proposal of creating a scoring system to quantify structural abnormalities found in HRCT CF patients, (16) a number of other scoring systems have been described and shown to be reproducible and comparable. The use of tomographic scores allows uniform interpretation of the images and quantify the pulmonary changes that reflect the severity of the disease. Regarding FC, the scoring systems for HRCT emphasize the importance of certain lung morphological changes and their pathological substrate. For example, the formation of mucous plugs plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of bronchiectasis, while the bronchial wall thickening reflects the presence of chronic or recurrent infection.(16) In our study, certain changes, such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening and formation of mucous plugs were present in over 70% of HRCT analyzed, regardless of microbiological group. Other authors also showed these three tomographic changes as the most prevalent HRCT in CF patients. (1,3,17). In parallel to the identification of the most prevalent change, the results of this study demonstrated that the use of a semiquantitative score for the detection of pulmonary abnormalities by HRCT in CF patients allows good overall agreement both intraobserver, and interobserver, demonstrating that the measures are reproducible and reliable. It was identified good interobserver agreement for the total score and three tomographic findings (acinar nodule, severity and extent of bronchiectasis). A group of authors (11) evaluated CT and spirometric changes in adults with CF. There was good interobserver correlation for the total scores; however, for structural changes individually, the agreement was good only for mosaic perfusion, while for severity of bronchiectasis, bronchial impairment and air trapping generations, the correlation was weak or moderate. Other authors, (3) to assess children chest HRCT images with CF through five different scores showed that all the scores were reproducible, with an ICC > 0.74, and the scores studied were causing greater variability between observers when the score was low, i.e., less committed tomographic images. This study showed that the intraobserver reliability for the modified Bhalla score was good and remained stable for both low total scores, as those high. The adopted score proved useful even in less advanced forms of the disease. The comparison between the two groups studied microbiological (Pa Sa and groups) showed that certain changes, such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening and formation of mucous plugs, were actually the most prevalent in each group when viewed in isolation. However, the prevalence of each of these three abnormalities was significantly higher in group Pa ( > 80%) than in group Sa (range, 30-55%). Noteworthy is also that bronchiectasis was present in 96.2% of the Pa group patients versus 33.3% of patients in the group Sa. This preponderance of irreversible lesions, such as bronchiectasis, is explained by the greater structural compromise of the airway group Pa, which is chronically exposed to infection / inflammation.(17,18) The presence of bronchiectasis appears to be one of the most important factors in the longitudinal decline in lung function in CF.(12) In a study of 82 patients with CF, which evaluated 12 risk factors for the development of irreversible lesions, such as bronchiectasis, only colonization by P. aeruginosa mucoid had significant correlation with the presence of this bronchial change .(19) In accordance with these data, it is noteworthy that, in this study, the group chronically colonized with P. aeruginosa, all patients had the mucoid phenotype, and HRCT showed a significantly higher prevalence of bronchiectasis. Few studies FC reference to differences of tomographic scores score in different microbiological groups. We emphasize one study, (20) from 25 children with CF, whose goal was to determine whether tomographic scores ranged from patients infected or not by P. aeruginosa. The chest HRCT held in time to clinical stability were analyzed from a tomographic score derived from Bhalla score. The results showed significantly higher total scores for the group infected by P. aeruginosa, reinforcing the recognized association between colonization with this bacterium and the disease progression. The CT findings were analyzed separately, and certain parameters, such as thickening of the bronchial walls, severity and extent of bronchiectasis and air trapping were also more prevalent in the group colonized by this bacteria. Corroborating these data, in our study, the results obtained from the total scores showed significantly higher values ​​for the PA group than for the group Sa. We also observed a higher prevalence of bronchiectasis, formation of mucous plugs, of commitment generations of bronchial division and pattern of mosaic attenuation in Pa group. Studies on the application of various scores have been described, but there is still no formal recommendation on the routine use of these systems.(21) .In addition, the application of HRCT in scores in patients with CF takes time and generates resistance to its use as a routine referral centers. However, the present study shows that application of the modified score Bhalla is possible and enables the discrimination between more or less serious impairment, identified as an important marker for disease progression, which is the chronic colonization by P. aeruginosa. Since the life expectancy of CF has increased, it must be the achievement of a significant number of radiological examinations, strengthening the existing large concern about the radiation dose involved in the method. The risk of secondary neoplasms exposure to relatively low doses of radiation is not widely known; however, current evidence suggests that this risk is low.(21) Under this view, although there is no consensus on the timing of performing CT scans, especially in infants and children in preschool age, some reference centers have implemented use every two years.(3) In conclusion, the total score of the highest scores and the presence of bronchiectasis in almost all chronically colonized with P. aeruginosa patients showed the severity of injuries in this group and confirm the association of chronic colonization with P. aeruginosa with the progression of structural lung injury in FC. Such evidence supports the premise that chronic colonization with P. aeruginosa raises a more prominent inflammatory response and leads to structural injury earlier.   