ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: To compare HRCT findings in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients chronically colonized by Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Staphylococcus aureus, using the modified Bhalla score, and to assess the method's  intraobserver and interobserver reliability.
 METHODS: A retrospective cross-sectional study involving 41 CF patients, 26 of which are chronically colonized by P. aeruginosa (Pa group) and 15 by S. aureus (Sa group). Two radiologists have independently analyzed these patients' HRCT images on two different occasions and applied the modified Bhalla scoring system. Intra- and interobserver reliability was assessed according to the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). RESULTS: There was good intraobserver and interobserver agreement (ICC > 0.8).
 Scores were higher in the Pa group than in the Sa group both for observer 1 (mean of 13.50 ± 3.90 and median of 13.5 vs. mean of 5.0 ± 5.28 and median of 3.0) and for observer 2 (mean of 11.96 ± 5.07 and median of 12.0 vs. mean of 5.07 ± 5.65 and median of 5.0). Tomographic findings such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, formation of mucus plugs, involvement of bronchial generations and mosaic attenuation pattern were more prevalent in the group colonized by P. aeruginosa. CONCLUSIONS: The modified Bhalla score proved to be reproducible and reliable for the evaluation of HRCT scans and enabled the differentiation between patients included in the two groups.
 The Pa group's higher scores showed greater structural lung impairment within this group. Key words: Cystic fibrosis; Tomography; Staphylococcus aureus; Pseudomonas aeruginosa.     Introduction In patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic bacterial infection is responsible for structural lung damage and progressive respiratory distress. Respiratory failure accounts for 95% of deaths in CF patients.
(1) Bacterial infections have an early onset in these patients and are associated with a limited number of microorganisms. Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae are associated with infections in younger patients. Subsequently, Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonizes the respiratory tract, and as the disease progresses, it produces a polysaccharide polymer called alginate, characterizing the mucoid phenotype, which provides greater resistance to antibiotics.
 Chronic infection with P. aeruginosa has been clearly associated with lung function decline, increased structural damage, higher morbidity and higher mortality in CF patients.(2) The primary goal of CF treatment and follow-up strategies is to combat the infection and progressive lung disease.
(1) Several diagnostic procedures have been recommended to evaluate respiratory impairment, including respiratory secretion cultures, pulmonary function tests and chest X-rays.
(1) Pulmonary function tests and chest X-rays are indirect measurements of the lung structure and are less sensitive to localized or early lesions.(3) Chest HRCT is considered a specific imaging method for assessing the involvement of the lung parenchyma and of the proximal and distal airways (bronchial wall thickening, bronchiectasis, mucoid impaction, and lung hyperinflation) at an early stage.
(4) Reproducible scoring systems can be used to quantify tomographic findings.(3) Some studies suggest that chest MRI is a promising imaging method for the detection of lung abnormalities in CF patients; however, a protocol for the use of this method in CF patients is yet to be established.(5) The objective of this study was to compare HRCT findings in CF patients that have been chronically colonized with P. aeruginosa or S. aureus by using a score system.
   Methods The research project was approved by the Ethics and Research Committee of the Fernandes Figueira Institute (CAAE 0042.0.008.000-07). This was a retrospective cross-sectional study with CF patients treated at the Pulmonology Section of the Fernandes Figueira Institute's Pediatrics Department (Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Ministry of Health), a referral center for CF patients (children and adolescents) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, between January 2007 and June 2008.
 Inclusion criteria for this study were as follows: to meet the diagnostic criteria for CF (6); to be under regular clinical and laboratory follow-up at the Fernandes Figueira Institute's Pulmonology Outpatient Clinic, including the collection and subsequent culture of respiratory secretions in scheduled appointments; and to have undergone, while clinically stable (without meeting the clinical criteria for respiratory exacerbation, such as increased coughing or secretion, changes in secretion appearance, weight loss, or loss of appetite), chest HRCT examinations according to the team's recommendations and treatment plan.
(7) The patients who were selected for this study were divided into two groups, according to the microbiological results of their respiratory secretions: the Sa group, consisting of patients whose respiratory secretions revealed the presence of S. aureus, but who had never been colonized by P. aeruginosa or whose secretion culture results had been negative for P. aeruginosa in the previous 12 months; and the Pa group, consisting of patients who met the criteria for P. aeruginosa chronic colonization (more than 50% of the positive cultures for P. aeruginosa) and who had presented no other pathogenic bacteria in their respiratory secretions in the previous 12 months.
 Demographic and clinical data were collected from the patient's medical charts.
 Respiratory secretions were processed according to specific and standardized protocols to monitor CF patients.(8) The microorganisms were initially identified by phenotypic methods and, when necessary, by molecular techniques, using PCR and sequencing of the recA and 16S rDNA genes at the Nonfermenting Gram-Negative Bacilli Laboratory (Rio de Janeiro State University's Microbiology Department).
(9) The patients included in this study underwent radiological assessments in accordance with the referral center's routines, which consist of tomographic scans with a minimum two-year interval when the patient is respiratorily stable.
 All HRCT scans were performed without sedation, using a ProSpeed-STM device (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI, USA) with 1mm thick slices and 10mm intervals, and with 80-100 mA/s and 120 kV parameters; the images were obtained with a 1,500 UH window and -700 HU level, according to the protocol of the institution's radiology department.
 This study used HRCT scans taken after both groups had been bacterially colonized by the microorganism, and the images were selected according to the inclusion criteria and evaluated by two pediatric radiologists with over 10 years of experience.
 The abnormalities were defined and adopted in accordance with the criteria established by the Fleischner Society (10) and the Illustrated Brazilian Consensus on the descriptive terminology and fundamental patterns of chest CT scans (11) (Figura 1).
 Subsequently, the two observers were blinded to the clinical and laboratory data and independently evaluated the images, applying the aforementioned scoring system to each exam. 
 The two observers repeated the process after an average period of three months.
 The study used the modified Bhalla scoring system,(12) whose changes and respective are described in Chart 1.
 Each patient's total score was obtained by
summing the severity and/or extent scores of each morphological change. The total score can range from zero (indicating no abnormalities) to 37 (indicating major changes in all parameters). The intraobserver and interobserver reliability (the first evaluation data) for each item score was assessed using the kappa coefficient, and values respected the following interpretation regarding the agreement: low (< 0.20); reasonable (0.21 to 0.40); moderate (0.41 to 0.60); good (0.61 to 0.80) and very good (> 0.81).(13,14) The degree of agreement between observers in both assessments was measured according to the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Intra- and interobserver reliabilities were also assessed by using the Bland & Altman plot.(15) The scores of the two patient groups were compared by assessing the descriptive statistics of each observer's score according to the microbiological groups.
 Statistical analyses were conducted by using the software Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version 12.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
 The results were compared and the statistical significance was assessed with the Mann-Whitney test, taking p < 0.05 as the level of statistical significance. The frequency of abnormal tomographic findings was also assessed.
 A tomographic finding was considered to be present only if the two observers agreed that the corresponding score was not zero. If one of the observers interpreted the score as zero, the abnormality was deemed absent.  Subsequently, the results of the two groups were compared and statistical significance was assessed by using the chi-square test, taking p < 0.05 as statistically significant.
   Results 41 patients were selected according to the inclusion criteria; 15 patients were allocated to the Sa group and 26 were allocated to the Pa group (Figure 2). Table 1 shows the demographic and microbiological characteristics of the study population.


 Intraobserver reliability as measured by the ICC was 0.824 and 0.892 for the first and second observers respectively, showing a good level of agreement between the two assessments.
 The Bland & Altman plot shows that the difference between the two assessments did not increase as the score increased. Interobserver reliability for the total score, as measured by the ICC, was 0.814, showing a good level of agreement between the observers.
 The Bland & Altman plot confirmed this agreement and showed that the difference between the two observers did not increase as the score increased. Table 2 describes intra- and interobserver reliability results for each parameter and for the total score.
 The comparison of the scores obtained for each patient group showed that the Pa group's scores were higher than those of the Sa group for observer 1 (mean of 13.50 ± 3.90 and median of 13.5 vs. mean of 5.0 ± 5.28 and median of 3.0) and for the second observer (mean of 11.96 ± 5.07 mean and median of 12.0 vs. 5.07 ± 5.65; median of 5.0), with statistical significance (p < 0.001). Tomographic findings such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, formation of mucus plugs, impaired generations of bronchial divisions and mosaic attenuation pattern were more prevalent in the Pa group than in the Sa group, with statistical significance (p < 0, 05).
 Air trapping and acinar nodules were more prevalent in the Pa group, and collapse/consolidation was more prevalent in the Sa group; however, these results were not statistically significant (p > 0.05).   Discussion Since it was first proposed that a scoring system be created to quantify structural pulmonary abnormalities seen on CF patients' HRCT scans, (16) various other scoring systems have been described and shown to be reproducible and comparable.
 The use of tomographic scores allows us to standardize image interpretation and quantify the pulmonary findings that indicate the severity of the disease.
 Regarding CF, HRCT scoring systems emphasize the importance of certain pulmonary morphological changes and their anatomopathological substrate.
 For example, the formation of mucous plugs plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of bronchiectasis, whereas the thickening of the bronchial wall reflects the presence of chronic or recurrent infection.
(16) Certain changes, such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening and the formation of mucous plugs, were found on more than 70% of the HRCT scans, regardless of the microbiological group. Other authors also reported that these three tomographic changes are the most prevalent HRCT findings in CF patients (1,3,17).

 In addition to the identification of the most prevalent findings, the results of this study showed that using a semiquantitative score to detect pulmonary abnormalities on HRCT scans of CF patients offers good overall intra- and interobserver agreement, demonstrating that the measures are reproducible and reliable.
 The study found a good level of interobserver agreement for the total score and for three tomographic findings (acinar nodule, bronchiectasis severity and bronchiectasis extent).
 A group of authors (11) evaluated tomographic and spirometric findings in adult CF patients. They found good interobserver agreement for the total scores; however, for individual structural changes, the agreement was good for mosaic perfusion only, whereas for bronchiectasis severity, involvement of bronchial generations and air trapping, the correlation was weak or moderate.
 Other authors (3) used five different scoring systems to evaluate chest HRCT scans of children with CF and showed that all scores were reproducible (ICC > 0.74) and that lower scores (i.e. CT images showing fewer a less severe changes) caused greater interobserver variability.
 The present study showed that intraobserver reliability for the modified Bhalla score was good and remained stable for both low and high total scores.
 The selected scoring system proved useful even in less advanced stages of the disease. The comparison between the two microbiological groups (Pa and Sa groups) showed that certain findings, such as bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening and mucous plugging, were actually the most prevalent changes within each individual group.
 However, the prevalence of each of these three abnormalities was significantly higher in the Pa group (> 80%) than in the Sa group (range, 30-55%). It should also be noted that bronchiectasis was found in 96.2% of the patients in the Pa group versus 33.3% in the Sa group.
 The preponderance of irreversible lesions such as bronchiectasis is due to the greater structural involvement of the airways in group Pa, which is chronically exposed to infection/inflammation.(17,18) The presence of bronchiectasis seems to be one of the most important factors for the longitudinal decline of lung function in CF patients
(12) A study involving 82 CF patients, which evaluated 12 risk factors for the development of irreversible lesions (such as bronchiectasis), found that only colonization with P. aeruginosa mucoid was significantly correlated with the presence of this bronchial change.(19) In accordance with these results, the present study found that all patients 
who were chronically colonized with P. aeruginosa had the mucoid phenotype, and that HRCT scans showed a significantly higher prevalence of bronchiectasis in those patients.
 Few CF studies address tomographic score differences in different microbiological groups.
 In one study,(20) 25 children with CF were investigated in order to determine whether there were any differences between patients who were infected with P. aeruginosa and those who were not. Chest HRCT scans, taken when the patients were clinically stable, were evaluated by means of a derivational Bhalla scoring system.
 The results showed that total scores were significantly higher in the group infected by P. aeruginosa, confirming the well-known correlation between colonization by this bacteria and the progression of the disease. Tomographic findings were also analyzed separately, and certain parameters, such as bronchial wall thickening, bronchiectasis severity, bronchiectasis extent and air trapping, were also found to be more prevalent in the group of patients colonized by this bacteria.
 In our study, the results obtained from the total scores were significantly higher in the Pa group than in the Sa group, thereby corroborating the aforementioned data.
 We also found that bronchiectasis, mucous plugging, involvement of bronchial generations and mosaic attenuation pattern were more prevalent in the Pa group. Studies on the application of various scoring systems have been described, but a formal recommendation for the routine use of such systems is yet to be made.
(21). Moreover, the use of HRCT scores in CF patients is a time-consuming task and the routine application of such systems in referral centers is met with some resistance.  This study, however, shows that a modified Bhalla score can be used to differentiate between less and more severe impairments, on the basis of an important marker of disease progression: chronic colonization by P. aeruginosa.
 Because the life expectancy of CF patients has increased, a considerable number of imaging tests is necessary, strengthening concerns about the radiation dose involved in such tests. 
 Although the risk of developing secondary neoplasms due to exposure to relatively low doses of radiation is yet to be determined, current evidence suggests that the risk is low.(21) Within this context, although there is no consensus as to how often CT scans should be performed, especially in infants and preschool-age children, some referral centers have established that CT scans be taken every two years.
(3) In conclusion, higher total scores and the presence of bronchiectasis in the vast majority of patients with chronic P. aeruginosa colonization show the severity of lesions in this group and confirm the correlation between chronic P. aeruginosa colonization and the progression of structural lung lesions in CF patients.
 Such evidence corroborates the premise that chronic P. aeruginosa colonization triggers a more prominent inflammatory reaction and leads to structural lesions at an earlier stage.
   