 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Compare the findings of HRCT in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) colonized chronically with Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Staphylococcus aureus, employing the score Bhalla modified, and assess the confiabilidades intraobservador and interobserver of the method. METHODS: the Study was cross-sectional, retrospective study including 41 patients with CF, 26 of which colonized chronically with P. aeruginosa (group Pa) and 15 by S. aureus (group Sa). Two radiologists reviewed independently on two occasions, the images of HRCT of these patients and applied the score Bhalla modified. The confiabilidades intra-and interobserver were assessed according to the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). RESULTS: There was good agreement intraobservador and interobserver (ICC > 0.8 is). The results of the scores of the group Pa were higher than those of group Sa for the observer 1 (average of 13,50 ± 3,90 and a median 13.5 vs. average of 5.0 ± 5,28 and a median of 3.0) and for observer 2 (mean 11,96 ± 5,07 and median 12.0 vs. mean 5.07 ± 5,65) and median of 5.0). Changes tomographic, such as bronchiectasis, thickening of the bronchial walls, formation of plugs and mucosal, the commitment of generations of divisions, the bronchial and the pattern of attenuation in the mosaic, were more prevalent in the group colonized by P. aeruginosa. CONCLUSIONS: THE score of Bhalla modified proved to be reproducible and reliable for the evaluation of HRCT and allowed the differentiation between the patients included in the two groups. Higher scores in the group of Pa evidenced greater commitment to structural lung in this group. Descriptors: cystic Fibrosis; Ct; Staphylococcus aureus; Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Introduction In cystic fibrosis (CF), bacterial infection, chronic is responsible for the injury structural pulmonary and respiratory dysfunction progressive, and respiratory failure is responsible for 95% of deaths in patients with CF. (1) The bacterial infections are established early in these patients and are associated with a limited number of micro-organisms. Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae are associated with infections in younger patients. Subsequently, Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonizes the respiratory tract and, with the course of the disease, passes to produce a polymer of polysaccharide called alginate, characterizing the phenotype mucoide, which confers greater resistance to the action of antibiotics. The chronic infection by P. aeruginosa has been clearly associated with the decline in lung function, worsening of structural lesions, increased morbidity and increased mortality in patients with CF. (2) combating infection and disease progressive lung has been the great aim of the strategies of monitoring and treating these patients. (1) To assess the impairment respiratory tract, it has been recommended a set of diagnostic procedures, which include cultures of secretion of respiratory tests respiratory function and radiological imaging of the thorax. (1) the evidence of The respiratory function and chest radiography are indirect methods of structure lung and are little sensitive to lesions localized or early. (3) HRCT of the chest is considered to be a specific method of imaging to assess early impairment of lung parenchyma and airways proximal and distal ends (thickening of the bronchial walls, bronchiectasis, impaction mucoide and hyperinflation pulmonary). (4) The changes tomographic can be punctuated by scores are reproducible. (3) Some studies have pointed to the magnetic resonance of the thorax as a method of image quite promising for the detection of pulmonary changes in CF; however, there is still a defined protocol for use of this method in CF. (5) The present study aimed to compare the changes of HRCT in patients with CF, colonised chronically with P. aeruginosa or S. aureus, employing a system of scores. Methods The study obtained approval of the Ethics Committee and Research of the Instituto Fernandes Figueira (CAAE 0042.0.008.000-07). This is a cross-sectional study, retrospective study conducted with patients with CF attended in the Service of Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, Instituto Fernandes Figueira (Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Ministry of Health), the reference center for FC (children and adolescents) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, during the period between January 2007 and June 2008. The inclusion criteria for the present study were the following: fill out the diagnostic criteria for CF(6); to be receiving follow-up clinical and laboratory regular in the Outpatient department of Pulmonology of the Instituto Fernandes Figueira, including the collection and subsequent culture of respiratory secretions in the consultations scheduled; and have been subjected to the examination of HRCT of the thorax according to the indication and the planning assistance team, at a time of clinical stability, that is, in the absence of clinical criteria of an exacerbation in respiratory, such as increased cough or secretion, change the appearance of the secretion, weight loss and loss of appetite. (7) The patients selected for inclusion in the study were separated into two groups, formed according to the result of the microbiological examinations of respiratory secretions: group Sa, comprised of patients who presented in the secretion of respiratory S. aureus, but which had never been colonized by P. aeruginosa or whose cultures of secretions were negative for P. aeruginosa in the last 12 months; and group Pa, consisting of patients who fulfilled the criteria of colonization chronic P. aeruginosa (more than 50% of cultures positive for P. aeruginosa) and that were not in other pathogenic bacteria in respiratory secretions for more than 12 months. From the medical charts of the included patients, we collected demographic and clinical data and. The respiratory secretions were processed according to specific protocols and standardized for the follow-up of patients with CF. (8) The micro-organisms were identified initially by methods phenotypic and additionally, when necessary, by molecular techniques, using PCR and sequencing of the gene recA and the 16S gene rDNA in the Laboratory of Rods Gram-Negative non-Fermenters of the Discipline of Microbiology at the State University of Rio de Janeiro. (9) The patients included in this study were submitted to the evaluations radiological as routine of the reference center, which consists of assessments tomographic, with an interval of at least two years when the patient is stable from the point of view of breathing. All the HRCT were performed without sedation, using the equipment ProSpeed-STM (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI, USA), with cuts of 1 mm thickness and intervals of 10 mm, with parameters of 80 to 100 mA/s and 120 kV; the images were photographed with a window of 1,500 HU and a level of -700 HU, of the agreement protocol with the service of radiology of the institution. For the present study, we used HRCT who had a later date to bacterial colonization by the organism of each group, and the images were selected according to the inclusion criteria, and submitted to a first evaluation by two radiologists, pediatric with over 10 years of experience. The abnormalities were defined and adopted in accordance with the criteria of the Society Fleischner(10) and of the Brazilian Consensus Illustrated on the terminology of the descriptors and fundamental patterns of CT of the thorax(11) (Figure 1). Subsequently, each observer evaluated the images independently and with blinding in relation to the clinical and laboratory data, by applying the aforementioned score for each examination. This process was repeated by the same observer after an average period of three months. The score adopted was Bhalla modified,(12) whose changes and their parameters for the analysis are described in Table 1. The total value of the score of the patient was obtained from the sum of the scores in relation to severity and/or extent of each of the morphological changes. This value can vary from zero (indicating the absence of abnormalities) 37 (indicating severe changes in all the parameters). The reliability intraobservador and interobserver (the data from the first assessment) for each item of the score was assessed by coefficient kappa, and the values comply with the following interpretation as to the agreement: poor (< 0,20); reasonable (0,21-0,40); moderate (0,41-0,60); good (0,61-0.80) and very good (> 0,81). (13,14) The degree of concordance between the observers in the two evaluations was assessed according to the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). The confiabilidades intra-and interobserver were also measured by means of the graphical layout of Bland & Altman. (15) The comparison of the results of the scores in the two groups of patients included in the study was made on the basis of an evaluation of the descriptive statistics of the score by the evaluator according to the groups microbiological. The statistical analyses were made using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 12.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The results were compared and the statistical significance was evaluated by Mann-Whitney test, adopting p < 0.05 as indicative of statistical significance. The abnormalities tomographic found were also assessed as to frequency of appearance. Each change ct scan was defined as present only if the two observers agreed that the score was different from zero. If one of them realize that the score was zero, the change was considered to be missing. Subsequently, the results obtained were compared between the two groups in question, and the statistical significance was evaluated through the chi-square test, considering p < 0.05 as statistically significant. Results according To the inclusion criteria, we selected 41 patients, of which 15 are allocated to the group Sa and 26 allocated in the group of Pa (Figure 2). The demographic characteristics and the microbiological population studied are described in Table 1. The reliability intraobservador, measured by the CCI, was 0,824 and 0,892 for the first and second observers, respectively, demonstrating a good correlation between the two evaluations. The graphical analysis of Bland & Altman, we see that the difference between the two moments of assessment has not increased to the extent that the score in the score increased. Reliability interobserver for the total score, measured by the CCI, was 0,814, showing a good correlation between the observers. The graphical analysis of Bland & Altman plots confirmed this correlation and showed that the difference between the two observers has not increased to the extent that the score of score increased. Table 2 describes the results reliability the intra-and interobserver compared to each parameter alone and for the total score. The comparison of the scores obtained for each group of patients showed that the results of the scores of the group Pa were higher than those of group Sa for the observer 1 (average of 13,50 ± 3,90 and a median 13.5 vs. average of 5.0 ± 5,28 and a median of 3.0) and for observer 2 (mean 11,96 ± 5,07 and median 12.0 vs. mean 5.07 ± 5,65) and median of 5.0), with statistical significance (p < 0.001). Changes tomographic, such as bronchiectasis, thickening of the bronchial walls, formation of plugs and mucosal, the commitment of generations of divisions, the bronchial and the pattern of attenuation in the mosaic, were more prevalent in group Pa than in group Sa, with statistical significance (p < 0.05). Entrapment of air and nodule acinar were more prevalent in the group of Pa, and collapse/consolidation was more prevalent in group Sa; however, these results were not statistically significant (p > 0.05). Discussion Since the proposal of the creation of a system of score to quantify the structural changes in the lung found in HRCT of patients with CF,(16) several other systems of scores have been described and shown to be reproducible and comparable. The use of the scores tomographic allows you to standardize the interpretation of the images and quantify the pulmonary changes that reflect the severity of the disease. In relation to FC, the systems score to HRCT emphasize the importance of some morphological changes of the lungs and its substrate pathological. For example, the formation of plugs mucosal has a crucial role in the pathogenesis of bronchiectasis, while the thickening of the bronchial walls reflects the presence of chronic infection or recurring. (16) In our study, certain changes, such as bronchiectasis, thickening of the bronchial walls and the formation of tampons mucosal, were present in more than 70% of the HRCT analyzed, regardless of the group microbiological. Other authors also demonstrated these three changes to tomographic as the most prevalent in the HRCT of patients with CF.(1,3,17). Parallel to the identification of the most prevalent, the results of the present study have demonstrated that the use of a score of semi-quantitative for the detection of abnormalities of lung by HRCT in patients with CF allows for good overall agreement both intraobservador, as interobserver, demonstrating that the measurements are reproducible and reliable. It was identified a good agreement interobserver for the total score and for three changes tomographic (nodule acinar, severity and extent of bronchiectasis). A group of authors(11) evaluated changes tomographic and spirometric adults with CF. There was good correlation interobserver for the total scores; however, for structural changes individually, the agreement was good only for perfusion in mosaic, as, for severity of bronchiectasis, the commitment of generations of the bronchial and trapping air, the correlation was low or moderate. Other authors,(3) to assess images of HRCT of the chest in children with CF through five scores different, showed that all scores were reproducible, with an ICC > 0,74, and that the scores evaluated caused a greater variability between the observers when scoring was low, that is, in images that are tomographic least compromised. In the present study, it was found that the reliability intraobservador for the score of Bhalla modified was good and remained stable for both the total scores low, as those high. The score adopted proved to be useful, even in ways less advanced disease. The comparison between the two groups microbiological studied (groups Pa and Sa) have shown that certain changes, such as bronchiectasis, thickening of the bronchial walls and the formation of tampons mucosal, were actually the most prevalent in each of the groups, when observed in isolation. However, the prevalence of each of these three abnormalities was significantly higher in group Pa (> 80%) than in group Sa (range, 30-55%). Stands out, still, that the bronchiectasis were present in 96,2% of patients in group Pa against 33,3% of patients in group Sa. This preponderance of irreversible damage, such as bronchiectasis, can be explained by the greater commitment to structural airway in the group of Pa, which is chronically exposed to infection/inflammation. (17,18) The presence of bronchiectasis seems to be one of the most important factors in the deterioration in longitudinal lung function in CF. (12) In a study of 82 patients with FC, which evaluated 12 risk factors for the development of irreversible damage, such as bronchiectasis, only the colonization by P. aeruginosa mucoide had significant correlation with the presence of this change in bronchial. (19) In agreement with these data, it is noteworthy that, in the present study, in the group colonized chronically with P. aeruginosa, all patients had the phenotype mucoide, and the HRCT showed a prevalence significantly greater in bronchiectasis. Few studies in CF make reference to the differences of score of scores on ct into groups microbiological distinct. Highlights of a study,(20) from 25 children with CF, whose goal was to determine if the scores on ct differed between patients infected or not by P. aeruginosa. The HRCT of the chest performed at the time of clinical stability, were analyzed from a score of ct-derived score Bhalla. The results showed total scores significantly higher for the group infected with P. aeruginosa, reinforcing the recognized association between colonization by this bacterium and disease progression. The changes tomographic were also analyzed separately, and certain parameters, such as thickening of the bronchial walls, severity and extent of bronchiectasis and air trapping, were also more prevalent in the group colonized by this bacterium. Corroborating these data, in our study, the results obtained from the total scores showed values significantly higher for group Pa than for the group Sa. We also observed a higher prevalence of bronchiectasis, training, caps, mucosal, and commitment of generations of divisions of the bronchial and of the default mitigation in the mosaic in the group Pa. Studies on the application of several scores have been described, but there is still no formal recommendation about the routine use of these systems. (21).In addition, the application of scores on HRCT in patients with CF is time-consuming and generates resistance in its use as a routine in centers of reference. However, the present study shows that the application of the score Bhalla modified, is possible, and allows for the discrimination between lesions more or less serious, identified from a marker to be important in the progression of the disease, which is the colonization of chronic P. aeruginosa. Since the life expectancy in CF has been increasing, imposes the achievement of a significant number of radiological investigations, reinforcing the big concern existing as to the dose of radiation involved in the method. The risk of development of malignancy secondary to exposure to relatively low doses of radiation is not widely known; however, current evidence suggests that this risk is low. (21) in this light, although there is no consensus regarding the frequency of performing tomographies, especially in infants and children of pre-school age, some referral centers have implemented its use every two years. (3) in Conclusion, the total score of the scores the highest and the presence of bronchiectasis in almost all of the patients chronically colonized by P. aeruginosa, show the severity of the injuries in this group and confirm the association of colonization in chronic P. aeruginosa with the progression of the structural lesions of the lungs in CF. Such evidence supports the premise that the colonization of chronic P. aeruginosa provokes an inflammatory response is more prominent and leads to structural lesions at an earlier stage. 