ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Although some evidence suggests an association between exposure technology in the scientific literature and its dissemination in clinical practice, few studies have examined this association. The aim of this study is to analyze the pattern of scientific publication on two competitive technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease (CAD) reflects what occurs in clinical practice. METHODS: We evaluated the number of scientific articles published each year in the medical literature (global scientific interest in technology) on two technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease: computed tomography and electron beam computed tomography with multiple detectors. It was also analyzed the number of countries that publish annual scientific articles about these technologies (geographic interest in technology). RESULTS: Computed tomography electron beam (electron beam computed tomography - EBCT) showed peak of "global scientific interest" in 2001, with 127 published articles. After this peak, the "global scientific interest" decreased by about 50% in 2008. In contrast, the "global scientific interest" by computed tomography with multiple detectors (multidetector computed tomography - MDCT) progressively increased until 2007, with 454 articles published in that year. The "geographic scientific interest" by EBCT had peak in 2002 with 14 countries publishing about this technology. After this summit, "geographic scientific interest" declined by almost 25% by 2008, with 11 countries publishing articles on this technology. In opposition, the "geographic scientific interest" by MDCT progressively increased until 2008, with 37 countries publishing articles on it. CONCLUSION: The medical literature supports the substitution of EBCT by MDCT in the evaluation of CAD. Keywords: Coronary disease, technology equipment and supplies, scientific and technical publications.     Introduction The heart images using computed tomography had as great initial boost the use of equipment with computed tomography technique of electron beam (electron beam computed tomography - EBCT) 1 whose main characteristic a high temporal resolution ( < 100 ms) . The EBCT allows noninvasively estimate the calcium deposits along the arteries coronárias2, and since such deposition is biologically associated disease aterosclerótica3, this technique can be used in the investigation of coronary artery disease (CAD). With the introduction of computed tomography with multiple detectors (multidetector computed tomography - MDCT) in the late 19904, the usefulness of EBCT in the noninvasive evaluation of CAD has become overwhelmed. Thus, cardiac imaging using MDCT started to substitute those made with EBCT5, which quickly became an obsolete technology. The signs of this obsolescence can be inferred from the fact that Imatron® (only company to manufacture the EBCT) has sold only 150 equipment, and General Electric®, which bought Imatron® in 2001, have stopped production of EBCT a few years após6. Another sign of obsolescence of EBCT originates from the history of technology in Brazil. The only service to acquire the EBCT in Brazil was the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein in 19987. With the subsequent deactivation of this technology about four years - part of the clinical experience of the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein with EBCT was published in December 2003 in the Archives of Cardiologia8 Brazilians. In the opposite direction to EBT, MDCT has gained more space in clinical practice. In a recent report submitted by the evaluation of IMV®9 diagnostic imaging market, it was found that the adoption of CT equipment 64 channels of cardiology services has doubled in the past two years. There is evidence that exposure to technology in the scientific literature is associated with the spread of this technology in clinical practice. Hillman10 suggests that the sigmoid curve of technological dissemination in clinical practice is preceded by another sigmoid curve representative of the dissemination of information that drives the commercial interest in the technology. According Greer11, there are four main ways to acquire interest in a technological innovation in the medical field. The most traditional and conventional way is the presentation of information on innovation in congress and publication in scientific journals, since the latter are considered the most reliable sources of information, as a result of peer review. Despite this evidence, there are few studies that effectively relate the trajectory of medical technologies in clinical practice with their exposure in the scientific literature. Thus, the aim of this study is to analyze the pattern of scientific publication on two competitive technologies used in the evaluation of CAD reflects what occurs in clinical practice.   Methods The database chosen for the search for related articles to the two technologies (EBCT and MDCT) was PubMed - a database of the US National Library of Medicine - which allows bibliographic searches in more than 17 million references in healthcare published about 5,200 scientific journals in both the United States and in more than 70 countries since 1949. PubMed is maintained by the Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online (Medline®) and is available on the Internet (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/). To make the search in PubMed, we used the Reference Manager® program. On June 20, 2009, we made the search of scientific articles published on the two technologies (EBCT and MDCT). The search strategies used were as follows: • Technology: MDCT. • Strategy: [(multidetector computed tomography) OR (MDCT) OR (multidetector CT) OR (multidetector computerized tomography) OR (MSCT) OR (multislice spiral computed tomography) OR (multislice CT) OR (multislice computed tomography) OR (multislice computerized tomography) OR (multi-slice computed tomography) OR (multi-slice computerized tomography)] AND (coronary). • Technology: EBCT. • Strategy: [(electron beam computed tomography) OR (electron beam tomography) OR (electron beam computerized tomography) OR (electron beam CT) OR (Imatron)] AND (coronary). The articles obtained in the searches were later separated by the year of publication and the country that published the article, derived from the evaluation of the place of publication available on PubMed. Some items that did not have the publishing address were subsequently excluded from the analysis. Thus, it was possible to obtain the number of articles published annually on the two technologies ( "global scientific interest" in technology) and the number of countries that have published about the technologies each year ( "geographic scientific interest" in technology). The project has funding from the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development - CNPq - No. 402491 / 2007-6), which enabled the acquisition of computers used in the analysis.   Results The searches performed in PubMed resulted in 1,122 (1,052 with address publication) published articles on EBCT and 1,983 (1,806 with publication address) on MDCT until 2008. The first article on EBCT obtained using this search strategy was published in 1992, and the first article on MDCT in 1999, which shows that the EBCT as heart evaluation of the technical run-up in seven years the technique by MDCT. Graphs 1 and 2 show the number of annual publications on the two technologies and countries that annually published articles about them.         In these graphs, it is observed that the EBCT showed a peak of "global scientific interest" in 2001 (127 published articles), two years after the emergence of MDCT in the scientific literature (1999), and as the interest in this increased , interest in EBCT was decreasing gradually until 2008, with the publication of only 60 articles. But the "global scientific interest" in the MDCT progressively increased since its introduction in literature in 1999, with 454 articles published in 2007. But the "geographic scientific interest" in the EBCT had a peak in 2002 with 14 countries publishing about this technology. After this summit, "geographic scientific interest" also declined by 2008, with 11 countries publishing articles on this technology. In opposition, the "geographic scientific interest" in the MDCT progressively increased until 2008, with 37 countries publishing articles.   Discussion In the last decades, a significant increase in the development of new technologies on health and consequently an increasing use of them in practical clínica12. In this context, the use of technology in diagnostic imaging area has greatly expanded, with growth rate of around 10% per year in Unidos13 States. With specific regard to CAD, it is natural that interest in the development of new diagnostic methods for the detection and monitoring of this pathology is large, since the prevalence of the disease is quite high, and this is the main cause of mortality in some populacionais14 groups. Thus, new diagnostic methods are often developed with the purpose of detecting CAD, from the simple electrocardiogram (ECG) to, most recently, positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography with multiple own detectores15. However, while some technologies are spread in a significant speed, can change the paradigms in attention to certain diseases, developed technologies do not always have an important clinical role, and some simply do not show significant clinical applicability and quickly pass the diffusion phase to the phase of obsolescence. It is evident, therefore, as the theme "technological diffusion" is important today, and health use technology properly is a major challenge for modern societies. However, evaluating the technology diffusion patterns is not easy due to the paucity of data in this area and the limited availability of such data in several countries. The association between the production of knowledge and the use of technology has been described. Bruce J. Hillman10, as mentioned, suggests that technological diffusion curve is preceded by a similar curve, representing the dissemination of knowledge about the technology in question. In a recent analysis, presented at the congress of the Society of Nuclear Medicine in Toronto16, observe any association between the number of scientific articles published about a group of technologies used in nuclear medicine and the use of these technologies in clinical practice. In 2005, for example, there was Pearson's correlation coefficient of 0.99 (p < 0.01) between the number of scientific publications and clinical use of technology. In order to deepen the evidence of this relationship between knowledge production and use of technology, in this paper we analyze the pattern of exposure in the scientific literature of two technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease (EBCT and MDCT), and the data suggest that EBCT became obsolete because the manufacturers have ceased their produção6. The findings of the scientific literature on these technologies were compatible with the substitution of EBCT by MDCT in clinical practice, as both the number of articles published on EBCT ( "global scientific interest" in technology) and the number of countries that publish annually on the subject ( "geographic scientific interest" in technology) began to decline a few years after the appearance of MDCT in the scientific literature. The reasons for this substitution should be the most diverse. Although the performance of these technologies in the assessment of calcium scores are quite comparáveis17 in the case of coronary angiography, which provides light and assessment of coronary stenosis, no technology equal. While EBCT can also perform CT angiography with contrast to coronary light display, the image quality is degraded because of limitations in the thickness of corte18. Moreover, this limitation on the cutting thickness becomes the lower EBCT to MDCT in the evaluation of other structures not cardíacas18. Thus, the EBCT is almost exclusively for evaluation of calcium score particularly problematic feature services that do not have many cardiac examinations. Regardless of the causes that led to the replacement of EBCT by MDCT, the results presented here support the hypothesis made by other autores10,11 that the scientific literature on certain technology is associated with the use thereof in clinical practice, increasing therefore the idea that the analysis of the scientific literature can serve as an indicator of the use of certain clinical practice technology. The observation of this association is quite interesting, since measuring the use of technology in clinical practice is difficult task due to the limited availability of data on this use. Instead, the measuring exposure technology in the literature can be carried out simply, using databases widely available on the Internet (PubMed, Embase, and lilacs, ISI, etc.). Whereas the assessment of technological diffusion in clinical practice is very important due to the increasing costs involved in this practice methods to estimate simply the behavior of the spread of different technologies may be useful to direct the investments to be made by providers health service and thus made to avoid investments in technologies obsolescence routes. Furthermore, it may also be useful in helping the system paying themselves (agreements and health insurance managers) in assessing which medical technologies have the potential to represent significant increases in medical care costs in the short and medium term.   Conclusions The exhibition of medical technologies in the scientific literature seems to serve as an estimate of the distribution patterns of these technologies in clinical practice and, in this work, is compatible with the substitution of EBCT by MDCT in the evaluation of coronary artery disease. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study was funded by CNPq. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   