ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Although some evidence suggests an association between exposure technology in the scientific literature and its dissemination on clinical practice, few studies have examined this association. The aim of this study is to analyze if the pattern of scientific publication about two competitive technologies, used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease (CAD), reflects what occurs on clinical practice. METHODS: We evaluated the number of scientific articles published each year in the medical literature (global scientific interest on technology) on two technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease: computed tomography and electron beam computed tomography with multiple detectors. It was also analyzed the number of countries that publish annual scientific articles about these technologies (geographic interest on technology). RESULTS: The electron beam computed tomography (EBCT) showed a peak of "global scientific interest" in 2001, with 127 published articles. After this peak, the "global scientific interest" decreased by about 50% in 2008. In contrast, the "global scientific interest" for the multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) progressively increased until 2007, with 454 articles published in that year. The "geographic scientific interest" by EBCT had a peak in 2002 with 14 countries publishing about this technology. After this peak, the "geographic scientific interest" declined by almost 25% until 2008, with 11 countries publishing articles on this technology. In opposition, the "geographic scientific interest" by MDCT progressively increased until 2008, with 37 countries publishing articles about it. CONCLUSION: The medical literature supports the substitution of EBCT by MDCT in the evaluation of the CAD. Keywords: Coronary disease, technology of the equipment and supplies, scientific and technical publications.     Introduction The heart images using computed tomography had, as a great initial boost, the use of machines equipped with the electron beam computed tomography (EBCT) technique  whose main characteristic is a high temporal resolution (<100 ms). The EBCT allows to non-invasively estimate the calcium deposits along the coronary arteries2, and since such deposition is biologically associated to the Atherosclerosis disease3, this technique can be used in the investigation of coronary artery disease (CAD). With the introduction of the multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) in the late 19904, the usefulness of EBCT on the non-invasive evaluation of the CAD has become overwhelmed. Thus, the cardiac images using MDCT started to substitute those made with EBCT5, which quickly became an obsolete technology. The signs of this obsolescence can be inferred from the fact that Imatron® (the only company to manufacture the EBCT) has sold only 150 devices, and General Electric®, which bought Imatron® in 2001, have stopped the production of EBCT a few years later6. Another sign of the obsolescence of the EBCT originates from the history of technology in Brazil. The only service to acquire the EBCT in Brazil was the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein in 19987. With the subsequent deactivation of this technology about four later - part of the clinical experience of the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein with EBCT was published in December 2003 in the Arquivos Brasileiros de Cardiologia8. In the opposite direction of EBCT, MDCT has gained more space on clinical practice. In a recent report submitted by the evaluation of diagnostic imaging company IMV®9, it was discovered that the adoption of 64 channels computed tomography equipment by cardiology services has doubled in the past two years. There is evidence that the exposure to technology in the scientific literature is associated with the spread of this technology on clinical practice. Hillman10 suggests that the sigmoid curve of technological dissemination on clinical practice is preceded by another sigmoid curve representative of the dissemination of information that drives the commercial interest on the technology. According to Greer11, there are four main ways to acquire interest on a technological innovation in the medical field. The most traditional and conventional way is the presentation of information on innovation in congresses and publications on scientific journals, since the latter are considered the most reliable source of information, as a result of peer review. Despite this evidence, there are few studies that effectively relate the trajectory of medical technologies on clinical practice with their exposure in the scientific literature. Thus, the aim of this study is to analyze if the pattern of scientific publication, on two competitive technologies used in the evaluation of CAD, reflects what occurs on clinical practice.   Methods The database chosen for the search for articles related to the two technologies (EBCT and MDCT) was PubMed - a database of the US National Library of Medicine - which allows bibliographic searches in more than 17 million references on health care published in about 5,200 scientific journals, in both the United States and in more than 70 countries since 1949. PubMed is maintained by the Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online (Medline®) and is available on the Internet (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/). To make the search in PubMed, we used the Reference Manager® software. On June 20, 2009, we made the search of scientific articles published on the two technologies (EBCT and MDCT). The used search strategies were as follows: Technology: MDCT. Strategy: [(multidetector computed tomography) OR (MDCT) OR (multidetector CT) OR (multidetector computed tomography) OR (MDCT) OR (multislice spiral computed tomography) OR (multislice CT) OR (multislice computed tomography) OR (multislice computed tomography) OR (multislice computed tomography) OR (multislice computed  tomography)] AND (coronary). • Technology: EBCT. • Strategy: [(electron beam computed tomography) OR (electron beam tomography) OR (electron beam computerized tomography) OR (electron beam CT) OR (imatron)] AND (coronary). The articles obtained in the searches were later separated by the year of publication and the country that published the article, derived from the evaluation of the place of publication available on PubMed. Some items that did not have the publishing address were subsequently excluded from the analysis. Thus, it was possible to obtain the number of articles published annually on the two technologies ("global scientific interest" on technology) and the number of countries that have published about the technologies each year ("geographic scientific interest" on technology). The project had funding from the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development - CNPq - No. 402491/2007-6), which enabled the purchase of computers used in the analysis.   Results The searches performed on PubMed resulted in 1,122 (1,052 with address publication) published articles on EBCT and 1,983 (1,806 with publication address) on MDCT until 2008. The first article on EBCT obtained using this research strategy was published in 1992, and the first article on MDCT in 1999, which shows that the EBCT as a heart evaluation technique was preceded in seven years by the MDCT technique. Graphs 1 and 2 show the number of annual publications on the two technologies and the countries that annually published articles about them.         In these graphs, we can see that the EBCT showed a peak of "global scientific interest" in 2001 (127 published articles), two years after the emergence of MDCT in the scientific literature (1999), and as the interest for it increased, the interest on EBCT decreased gradually until 2008, with the publication of only 60 articles. But the "global scientific interest" on MDCT progressively increased, since its introduction in the literature in 1999, with 454 articles published in 2007. But the "geographic scientific interest" in the EBCT had a peak in 2002, with 14 countries publishing about this technology. After this peak, the "geographic scientific interest" also declined until 2008, with 11 countries publishing articles on this technology. In opposition, the "geographic scientific interest" on MDCT progressively increased until 2008, with 37 countries publishing articles.   Discussion In the last decades, there has been a significant increase in the development of new health technologies and consequently an increasing use of them on clinical practice12. In this context, the use of technologies in the diagnostic by images area has greatly expanded, with a growth rate of around 10% per year in the United States13. Specifically, with regard to the CAD, it is natural that the interest in the development of new diagnostic methods for the detection and monitoring of this pathology is large, since the prevalence of the disease is quite high, and this is the main cause of mortality in some population groups14. Thus, new diagnostic methods are often developed with the purpose of detecting the CAD, from the simple electrocardiogram (ECG) to, most recently, the positron emission tomography, the magnetic resonance imaging and multidetector computed tomography15. However, while some technologies spread in a significant speed, being able to change the paradigms in the attention to certain diseases, the developed technologies do not always have an important clinical role and some simply do not show significant clinical applicability, and quickly pass the spreading phase to the obsolescence phase. It is evident, therefore, how important the "technological diffusion" theme is today, and the adequate use of technology on health care is a major challenge for modern societies. However, evaluating the technology spreading patterns is not easy, due to the paucity of data in this area and the limited availability of such data in several countries. The association between the production of knowledge and the use of technology has been described. Bruce J. Hillman10, as mentioned, suggests that the technological spreading curve is preceded by a similar curve, representing the dissemination of knowledge about the considered technology. In a recent analysis, presented at the congress of the Society of Nuclear Medicine in Toronto16, we observed an association between the number of scientific articles published about a group of technologies used on nuclear medicine and the use of these technologies on clinical practice. In 2005, for example, the Pearson's correlation index of 0.99 (p < 0.01) was verified among the number of scientific publications and the clinical use of the technologies. In order to deepen the evidence of this relationship between knowledge production and use of technology, in this paper we analyze the pattern of exposure in the scientific literature of two technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease (EBCT and MDCT), and the data suggest that EBCT became obsolete, because the manufacturers have ceased their production6. The findings of the scientific literature on these technologies were compatible with the substitution of EBCT by MDCT on clinical practice, as both the number of articles published on EBCT ("global scientific interest" on technology) and the number of countries that annually publish on the subject ("geographic scientific interest" on technology) began to decline a few years after the appearance of MDCT in the scientific literature. The reasons for this substitution must be the most diverse. Although the performance of these technologies in the assessment of calcium scores are quite comparable17, in the case of coronary angiography, which provides an evaluation of the light and assessment of coronary stenosis, there is no technology equality. While EBCT can also perform angiotomography with contrast for the visualization of the coronary light, the image quality is degraded due to limitations in the thickness of the slice18. Moreover, this limitation on the slice thickness makes EBCT inferior to MDCT in the evaluation of other non-cardiac structures18. Thus, the EBCT is almost exclusively for evaluation of calcium level, a particularly problematic feature in services that do not have many cardiac examinations. Regardless of the causes that led to the replacement of EBCT by MDCT, the results presented here support the hypothesis made by other authors10,11 that the scientific literature on certain technology is associated with the use thereof on clinical practice, increasing therefore the idea that the analysis of the scientific literature can serve as an indicator of the use of certain clinical practice technology. The observation of this association is quite interesting, since measuring the use of technology on clinical practice is a difficult task, due to the limited availability of data on this use. Instead, the measurementof  the exposure of the technology in scientific literature can be carried out simply, using databases widely available on the Internet (PubMed, Lilacs and Embase, ISI, etc.). Whereas the assessment of technological diffusion on clinical practice is very important, due to the increasing costs involved in this practice, methods that allow to estimate, in a siple way, the behavior of the spread of different technologies may be useful to direct the investments to be done by the providers of health service, and in this manner to avoid investments on technologies on the obsolescence routes. Besides, it may be also useful to help those who pay for the system (insurance managers and health insurers) in the evaluation of which medical technologies have the potential to represent significant increases on medical care costs in the short and medium term.   Conclusions The exhibition of medical technologies in the scientific literature seems to serve as an estimate of the distribution patterns of these technologies on clinical practice and, in this work, is compatible with the substitution of EBCT by MDCT in the evaluation of coronary artery disease. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare that there is no potential conflict of interest. Sources of Funding This study was funded by CNPq. Academic Linkage There is no linking in this study to postgraduate programs.   