 SUMMARY background: Despite some evidence suggesting an association between the exposure of a technology in the scientific literature and its diffusion in clinical practice, few studies have assessed this association. Objective: THE OBJECTIVE of this study is to analyze if the pattern of scientific publication on two competitive technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease (cad) reflects what occurs in clinical practice. METHODS: we Evaluated the number of scientific articles published annually in the medical literature (scientific interest in global technology) on two technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease: computed tomography electron beam and computed tomography with multiple detectors. It was also analyzed the number of countries that publish each year the scientific articles about these technologies (geographical interest in the technology). RESULTS: computed tomography electron beam (electron beam computed tomography - EBCT) presented the apex of "scientific interest" global in 2001, with 127 papers published. After this peak, the "scientific interest" global decreased by approximately 50% in 2008. In opposition, the "scientific interest" global by computed tomography with multiple detectors (multidetector computed tomography - MDCT) has increased steadily until 2007, with 454 articles published in that year. The "scientific interest geographic" by EBCT had peaked in 2002, with 14 countries publishing about this technology. After this peak, "the scientific interest geographic" has declined by almost 25% by 2008, with 11 countries publishing articles about this technology. In opposition, the "scientific interest geographic" by MDCT was increased gradually up to 2008, with 37 countries publishing articles about it. CONCLUSION: THE scientific literature medical is compatible with the replacement of the EBCT by MDCT in the evaluation of cad. Key words: Disease of the coronary, technology equipment and supplies, scientific and technical publications. Introduction The images of the heart using computed tomography have had as a great initial impetus to the use of equipment with the technique of computed tomography electron beam (electron beam computed tomography - EBCT)1 that has as main characteristic a high temporal resolution (<100 ms). The EBCT allows to estimate non-invasively the calcium deposits along the arteries coronárias2, and, since this deposition is linked biologically to the disease aterosclerótica3, this technique can be used in the investigation of coronary artery disease (cad). With the introduction of computed tomography with multiple detectors (multidetector computed tomography - MDCT) at the end of the year 19904, the usefulness of EBCT in the evaluation is not invasive of the DAC started to be swallowed up. In this way, the images of the heart using MDCT began to replace those made with the EBCT5, which quickly became an obsolete technology. The signs of this obsolescence can be inferred from the fact of the Imatron® is the only company to manufacture the EBCT) have only sold 150 pieces of equipment, and General Electric®, which bought the Imatron® in 2001, have interrupted the production of the EBCT few years após6. Another sign of the obsolescence of the EBCT comes from the proper trajectory of the technology in Brazil. The only service to acquire the EBCT in Brazil was the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, in 19987. With subsequent deactivation of this technology about four years after - part of the clinical experience of the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein with the EBCT was published in December 2003 in the Brazilian Archives of Cardiologia8. In the opposite direction to EBCT, MDCT has gained each time more space in the practice clinic. In a recent report presented by the company, market evaluation of diagnostic imaging IMV®9, it was found that the adoption of equipment of computed tomography 64-channel services cardiology has doubled in the last two years. There is evidence that the exposure of a technology in the scientific literature is associated with the diffusion of this technology in clinical practice. Hillman10 suggests that the sigmoidal curve of technological diffusion in clinical practice is preceded by another sigmoidal curve representative of the spread of information that urges the commercial interest for the technology. Second Greer11, there are four main ways by which the learner acquires an interest in a technological innovation in the medical field. The more traditional way and conventional is by the presentation of information on innovation in the congress and by publication in scientific journals, since the latter are considered the most reliable sources of information, as a result of peer review. Despite this evidence, there are very few jobs that actually relate to the trajectory of medical technologies in clinical practice with its exposure in the scientific literature. Therefore, the objective of this study is to analyze if the pattern of scientific publication on two competitive technologies used in the review of the DAC reflects what occurs in clinical practice. Methods The database of choice for the search of articles related to two technologies (EBCT and MDCT) was the PubMed - a database of the U. S. National Library of Medicine, which allows bibliographic searches in more than 17 million references in the area of health published in approximately 5,200 journals, both in the United States and in more than 70 countries, since 1949. PubMed is maintained by the Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online (Medline®) and are available on the internet http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/). To conduct a search in PubMed, we used the program Reference Manager®. On 20 June 2009, we made the search of scientific articles published about the two technologies (EBCT and MDCT). The search strategies used were the following: • Technology: MDCT. • Strategy: [(multidetector computed tomography) OR (MDCT) OR (multidetector CT) OR (multidetector computerized tomography) OR (MSCT) OR (multislice spiral computed tomography) OR (multislice CT) OR (multislice computed tomography) OR (multislice computerized tomography) OR (multi-slice computed tomography) OR (multi-slice computerized tomography)] AND (coronary artery disease). • Technology: EBCT. • Strategy: [(electron beam computed tomography) OR (electron beam tomography) OR (electron beam computerized tomography) OR (electron beam CT) OR (imatron)] AND (coronary artery disease). The articles obtained in the search were later separated by the year of publication and the country that published the article, derived from the evaluation of the address of the publication is available on PubMed. Some articles that did not have the address of the publication were subsequently excluded from the analysis. In this way it was possible to obtain the number of articles published each year about the two technologies ("scientific interest" global technology) and the number of countries that have published about the technologies of each year ("interest scientific geographic" in the technology). The project had funding from the National Council of Technological and Scientific Development - CNPq - ( 402491/2007-6), which enabled the acquisition of the computers used in the analysis. Results The searches in PubMed resulted in 1.122 (1.052 with address for publication) published articles about the EBCT and 1.983 (1.806 (address of publication) on the MDCT until 2008. The first article about EBCT retrieved using this search strategy, was published in 1992, and the first article on MDCT, in 1999, which shows that the EBCT as a technique of evaluation of the heart leading to in seven years, the technique for MDCT. Charts 1 and 2 show the amount of annual publications on the two technologies and the countries that published annually with articles about them. In these graphs, it is observed that the EBCT showed a peak of "scientific interest" global in 2001 (127 articles published), two years after the advent of MDCT in the scientific literature (1999), and, to the extent that the interest for this has increased, the interest by EBCT has been gradually decreasing until 2008, with the publication of only 60 articles. Already the "scientific interest" global in the MDCT has increased gradually since its introduction in the literature in 1999, with 454 articles, published in 2007. Already the "scientific interest geographic" on EBCT had a peak in 2002, with 14 countries publishing about this technology. After this peak, "the scientific interest geographic" also declined up to 2008, with 11 countries publishing articles about this technology. In opposition, the "scientific interest geographic" on MDCT was increased gradually up to 2008, with 37 countries publishing articles. Discussion In recent decades, there has been a significant increase in the development of new technologies in the area of health and, consequently, a growing use of them in practice clínica12. In this context, the use of technology in the area of diagnostic imaging has greatly expanded, presenting growth rate of the order of 10% a year in the United Unidos13. In relation specifically to the DAC, it is natural that the interest in the development of new diagnostic methods for the detection and monitoring of this pathology is large, since the prevalence of the disease is quite high, in addition to this being the main cause of mortality in some groups populacionais14. In this way, new diagnostic methods are often developed with the purpose to detect the DAC, since the ekg is simple (ECG) to, more recently, positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and the computed tomography with multiple detectores15. However, while some technologies have spread at a speed that was expressive, and may change the paradigms in the care of certain diseases, it is not always the technologies developed have a role in clinical relevant, and some simply do not present clinical applicability significant and rapidly pass from the stage of diffusion to the phase of obsolescence. It is evident, therefore, how the theme of "technological diffusion" is important in the present day, and the use of technology in adequate health is a major challenge for modern societies. However, to evaluate the patterns of technological diffusion is not an easy task due to the shortage of data in this area and the limited availability of these data in various countries. The association between the production of knowledge and the use of technology has been described. Bruce J. Hillman10, as already quoted, suggests that the curve of technological diffusion is preceded by a curve similar, representing the spread of knowledge about the technology in question. In a recent analysis, presented at the congress of the Society of Nuclear Medicine in Toronto16, we observed association between the number of published scientific articles on a group of technologies used in nuclear medicine and the use of these technologies in clinical practice. In 2005, for example, it was found index of Pearson correlation 0.99 (p < 0.01) between the number of scientific publications and the clinical use of technologies. In order to deepen the evidence of this relationship between the production of knowledge and use of technology, in the present work, we analyze the pattern of exposure in the scientific literature of two technologies used in the evaluation of coronary artery disease (EBCT and MDCT), and the existing data suggest that the EBCT came into obsolescence because manufacturers have ceased produção6. The findings of the scientific literature on these technologies were compatible with the replacement of the EBCT by MDCT in clinical practice, since both the number of articles published about the EBCT ("scientific interest" global technology) and as the number of countries that annually publish on the subject of"scientific interest geographic" in technology) began to decline a few years after the appearance of MDCT in the scientific literature. The reasons for the substitution must be the most diverse. Although the performances of these technologies in the evaluation of the calcium scores are quite comparáveis17, in the case of angiotomografia of the coronary artery, which provides the evaluation of the light and stenosis of the coronary artery, there is no equality in technology. Although EBCT can also be used to angiotomografia with contrast for visualization of the light heart, the image quality is degraded because of limitations in the thickness of the corte18. In addition, this limitation on the thickness of the cut makes the EBCT inferior to MDCT in the evaluation of other structures not cardíacas18. In this way, the EBCT is almost exclusively for the evaluation of calcium score, a feature particularly problematic in departments that do not have many exams to heart. Regardless of the causes which led to the replacement of the EBCT by MDCT, the results presented here corroborate the hypothesis made by other autores10,11 that the scientific production on a certain technology is associated with the use of this in clinical practice, reinforcing, therefore, the idea that the analysis of the scientific literature can serve as an indicator of the use of certain technology in the clinical practice. The observation of this association is quite interesting, since it measure the use of technology in clinical practice is difficult due to the low availability of data about this use. On the contrary, the measurement of the exposure of the technology in the scientific literature may be performed in a simple way, using databases widely available on the internet (PubMed, Lilacs and Embase, ISI, among others). Considering that the evaluation of the diffusion of the technology in clinical practice is quite important in view of the rising costs that involve this practice, the methods that allow to estimate in a simple way the behavior of the diffusion of different technologies may be useful to direct the investments to be made by the service providers in health and, this done, to avoid investments in technologies in the process of obsolescence. In addition, it may also be useful to help their own paying system (managers of covenants, and health insurance) on the assessment of which medical technologies have the potential to represent significant increases in costs of medical attention in the short and medium term. Conclusions The exposure of medical technologies in the scientific literature seems to serve as an estimate of the diffusion patterns of these technologies in clinical practice and, in the present work, is compatible with the replacement of the EBCT by MDCT in the evaluation of coronary artery disease. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study was funded by CNPq. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 