OBJECTIVE: To describe the distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a population of asymptomatic white Brazilian men undergoing assessment with ultrafast computed tomography. METHODS: We evaluated 2,253 men of 22-88 years undergoing computed tomography in an ImatronR C150 device for detecting coronary calcium. The data were divided into 7 age groups: < 40 years, 40-44 years, 45-49 years, 50-54 years, 55-59 years, 60-64 years and > 65 years. RESULTS: The mean and standard deviation of age were 50.0 ± 9.7 years. In 48.8% of cases , the coronary artery calcium score > zero, with a non - Gaussian distribution and a large variation for the same age group. A direct correlation between age and coronary calcium scores (r = 0.4, p < 0.01). Except when comparing individuals in the age groups 60-64 years and 55-60 years below and above 65, the greater the largest age group median of coronary artery calcium scores (p < 0.0001). Coronary artery calcium scores are reported according to the percentiles 25,50,75 and 90 for the age groups. CONCLUSION: This study, the first to report the distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a sample of white Brazilian men, you may be useful for stratifying the risk of coronary events. Keywords: computed tomography electron beam, coronary artery disease, diagnosis Coronary Atherosclerosis is a major cause of mortality in our country1. Atherosclerotic disease is multifactorial and the identification of individuals at high risk for coronary events is extremely important, since preventive therapies, such as the change of life style and the use of drugs such as statins and aspirin significantly reduce clinical events and mortality2. Classically, risk stratification of coronary events is done through the set of risk factors analysis. However, epidemiological data show that about 25% of individuals who died suddenly of cardiac causes no previous symptoms and even the classic tools for assessing the risk of coronary events, such as the Framingham scores, have limitations in identifying individuals at high risco3,4. It is proven that about 50% of coronary deaths and most myocardial infarctions occur in individuals considered at low and intermediate risk, according to clinical and laboratoriais3 parameters. Thus, assessment of subclinical atherosclerosis through imaging techniques may be useful for risk stratification, since there is evidence that atherosclerotic plaque load correlates with the risk events coronarianos5-6. The coronary artery calcification (Fig. 1) detected by ultrafast computed tomography, or emission tomography guard correlation electrons with atherosclerotic plaque burden in histological studies, angiographic and ultrasound intravascular7-10. The ultrafast computed tomography is a noninvasive and very sensitive to detect calcification of artery coronária7. There is evidence that coronary artery calcification with ultrafast CT may be a risk marker of clinical events of coronary artery disease independent of risk factors for aterosclerose11-14. So far we have not described the coronary calcium scores in the Brazilian population. The aim of this study was the description of the distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a population sample of Brazilian men, whites, asymptomatic, submitted for evaluation by ultrafast computed tomography.     Methods We evaluated 2253 asymptomatic men, cardiovascular standpoint, undergoing ultrafast computed tomography in the Jardins Diagnostic Unit of the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, from November / 99 to April / 02. The indication for examination was made by doctors of patients in routine assessments. Individuals with a clinical diagnosis of coronary artery disease or undergoing angiography, revascularization catheter or coronary artery bypass surgery were excluded. CT scans were performed in a tomograph ImatronR C-150 (Imatron Coporation, San Francisco, California) and the imaging procedure was obtained by axial heart with a thickness of 3mm, at the end of diastole triggered by the electrocardiogram, a range of time of 100ms during the inspiratory pause. Coronary artery calcification was considered the image of two contiguous pixels with attenuation coefficient > 130 Hounsfield units. The coronary calcium score was calculated by Agatston15 method, multiplying the calcification area in square millimeters by a factor of 1, 2, 3 or 4, depending on the attenuation coefficients determined by calcium. Factor 1 was used when these coefficients are between 130 and 199 Hounsfield units, factor 2, when between 200 and 299 Hounsfield units; factor 3 300 and 399 and factor 4 for coefficients greater than 400 Hounsfield units. The coronary calcium score was the sum of all scores of all coronary arteries in all tomographic cuts and calculated by the computer program AccuscoreR (AccuImage Diagnostics Corporation, USA). However, the program only made calculations after confirmed the presence of calcium by the operator. The data were divided into 7 age groups: < 40 years, 40-44 years, 45-49 years, 50-54 years, 55-59 years, 60-64 years and > 65 years. the mean, median and standard deviation calculated and descriptive statistics were performed in each of the age groups through the Microsoft ExcelR programs (Microsoft, Brazil) and Sigmastat for WindowsR (Jandel Scientific, USA). The Gaussian distribution or not the data was evaluated using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Age correlation was performed with the values ​​of coronary calcium scores by Spearman test and values ​​of coronary artery calcium scores were also compared with each other in different age groups by repeated measures analysis of variance test (RM-ANOVA) nonparametric and the Dunn test. Significant was considered the two-tailed p value < 0.05.   Results The mean, standard deviation and the age range was 50 ± 9.7 years (22-88 years). The incidence of coronary calcium score > zero in 48.8% of cases. Table I are the mean, median and standard deviation of coronary artery calcium scores that had a non-Gaussian distribution and showed great variation for the same age group. A direct correlation between age and the coronary calcium score (r = 0.4, p < 0.01). Aside from comparing individuals in the age groups 60-64 years, 55-60 years below and above 65, the greater the largest age group median of coronary artery calcium scores (p < 0.0001). Table II shows the coronary calcium scores are separated according to the distribution of percentiles 25, 50, 75 and 90.         Discussion The determination of coronary artery calcification by ultrafast computed tomography has been used in preventive cardiology to assess the risk of coronary events in individuals assintomáticos7. Coronary artery calcium scores are the way to systematize these values ​​with diagnostic and prognostic intention. This study is the first to describe the coronary calcium scores assessed by ultrafast computed tomography in a Brazilian population sample. Previously was no description in the literature of coronary calcium scores only for populations of EUA13,16,17. The description of the coronary calcium scores is necessary in our population, since not only the prevalence of coronary artery disease that differs in our country, but also its ethnic composition, mentioned above. The distribution of coronary artery calcium scores show a high variation of its values, and the distribution does not follow the Gauss curve. The standard deviations are larger than average, which causes the classic presentation as mean and standard deviation becomes inadequate. However, for descriptive purposes, they were placed on the table. Thus, the median would be the best way to show the data. In all studied age groups, 50% of people had a score of zero, which justifies the median values ​​of Table I. Just as in other populations, coronary artery calcium scores increased with idade13,16,17, however, due to non - Gaussian distribution and the small number of individuals in the age > 60 years in our sample jeopardized a better comparison of calcification coronary artery between the track and the tracks just below and above. Although the medians are higher, there was no statistical difference in these values. It is important to note that despite this apparent limitation, there is evidence that greater specificity for detecting the risk of coronary events is in the evaluation of coronary artery calcification between the ages of 35 to 55 or 60 years7. In our study, 75% of the individuals had less than 60 years of age. Although age is an important determinant of coronary calcium score other risk factors for atherosclerosis, such as smoking, cholesterol, high blood pressure among others, were not evaluated in this study and in studies that described the coronary calcium scores in the US population by analysis multivariate. In the tomographic images obtained by ultrafast computed tomography coronary artery calcification can be easily identified by presenting density 8 times higher than that of circunvizinhos18 tissues. The ultra fast CT scanner ImatronR differs from conventional and modern helical because its image acquisition rate is 50-100 ms, that is 3 to 6 times faster, which reduces the risk of artifacts, and makes this device the standard gold for evaluation coronariana7 arterial calcification. A strong correlation between coronary artery calcification identified by fluoroscopy or pathology and coronary artery disease has been known since 196,119.20. More recent research suggests that calcium already present in the atherosclerotic plaque in their early stages, when the lesion is composed only of gordura21 streaks. However, at this stage calcium can not be identified by means of non-current invasive methods. As in the lesion progresses, with the addition of cholesterol, inflammatory cells and fibrous tissue, calcium accumulates in the form of boards on the basis of the intima and becomes identifiable by ultrafast computed tomography. Simons et al 22 analyzed and sequential histological sections from the initial to the caudal portions of 525 coronary arteries. Although calcium was not in all lesions, a significant correlation between the calcium and the amount of atherosclerosis in each coronary artery was found. The calcification without injuries, almost entirely, no significant obstruction of the coronary lumen, demonstrating that the identification and quantification of calcium allow, in a way, measure the degree of coronary artery disease. A similar study of Rumberger et al., correlate the quantification of coronary calcium by ultrafast computed tomography in hearts at autopsy and histopathological quantification, confirmed these data23. Angiographic and coronary ultrasound also shown that coronary artery calcification is correlated with aterosclerótica8-10 plaque burden and this, in turn, correlates with the risk events coronarianos5-6. Several studies in asymptomatic or not to coronary artery disease individuals, have shown correlation of coronary artery calcification with obstruction light vaso9,18,24. However, although the sensitivity of ultrafast computed tomography for the diagnosis of coronary artery obstruction reaches 95%, its specificity is around 66% 24 fact that jeopardizes their role in screening for coronary stenoses. The main use of ultrafast tomography lies in the ability to identify individuals at high risk for coronary events, independent of risk factors clássicos3 way. American data show that about 50% of coronary events originate from the so-called intermediate risk range, according to the use of clinical data for stratification, such as that of the Framingham tables. Thus, it is necessary that other tests are used to better risk stratification of coronary events. Data from the literature have demonstrated the presence of coronary artery calcification is associated with increased risk events coronarianos11-14, and its absence is associated with a risk of coronary events, virtually zero, follow-up studies 3 to 5 years25 . Coronary artery calcium scores have their major application to stratify the risk of clinical events. A recent meta-analysis showed that patients with coronary calcium scores above the median had a relative risk of death from coronary artery disease or myocardial infarction of 4.2 times (95% CI 1.6 to 11.13) compared to individuals with coronary calcium score below mediana26. There is evidence that individuals with coronary calcium score above percentile 67, 75 and 80, for sex and age, which were the upper percentiles depending on the assessed sample, showed an annual absolute risk of myocardial infarction and or death from coronary artery disease 1.8%, 2.3% and 4.5%, putting these patients at high risk range. Another option proposed in a prospective study to assess the risk of coronary events was the use of absolute scores and not the distribution of the age and sexo11. Classically, coronary calcium scores above 400 are associated with increased risk of coronary stenoses and events clínicos27. Arad et al 11 in a follow-up of 1,172 individuals for 3 years, showed that a coronary calcium score > 160 was associated with an odds ratio of 20.2 times an individual has a myocardial infarction or death from coronary artery disease. These findings were independent of classic risk factors. However, in a population at high risk for coronary according to clinical data events, coronary calcium scores were not higher than the Framingham scores to identify the individuals who had clínicos28 events. These data were contested due to inadequate methodology of the tests performed by Detrano et al. Recently, Grundy29 proposed the association of coronary artery calcium scores with Framingham scores for risk stratification of coronary events. It is known that age is a major risk markers for coronary events associated with increased atherosclerotic plaque burden. The determination of a more or less coronary artery calcification, as indicating the amount of atherosclerotic plaque, reduces or increase the points attributed to age in the Framingham tables. The main criticism of prospective studies with ultrafast computed tomography are the small number of clinical events during follow-up, limiting the discriminative power of these estudos25. Similarly, criticisms are made to the indiscriminate use of tests without a medical indication, based on Bayes theory, since the use of ultrafast computed tomography in low clinical risk individuals exceptionally identify individuals at high risk of events coronarianos31. Consequently, the costs of a wholesale evaluation become prohibitive from a public health point of view. The MESA study with more than 6,500 individuals from diverse ethnic groups, held in the USA compared to ultrafast computed tomography, evaluation of intimate relationship / average carotid artery by ultrasound and clinical risk scores to determine whether the non-invasive techniques are superior complementary or lower than the clinical assessment of risk events coronarianos25. In conclusion, based on the current literature, when well indicated the evaluation of coronary calcium scores is useful in stratification of coronary risk. Once individuals at high risk events identified, we propose that they be treated according to current guidelines for prevention, especially as regards the use of statins and acetilsalicílico2 acid. To follow up our work, become necessary determinations in women, more men at older ages and different population studied social class (middle class individuals), comparison of coronary calcium scores described in Brazilian populations to US since these are the standards available in the literature. If there are differences, a prospective study of the value of coronary artery calcification in our population would be important. Our study is a beginning to this process. We emphasize, as limitations, the predominance of Caucasians and middle class in our population. Studies are being conducted in a larger number of individuals of both sexes, different races and social classes.   