OBJECTIVE SUMMARY: To describe the distribution of coronary calcium scores in a population of asymptomatic white Brazilian men undergoing assessment with ultrafast computed tomography. METHODS: 2,253 men of ages between 22 and 88 years old have been evaluated and subjected to computed tomography in an ImatronR C150 device for detecting coronary calcium The data was divided into 7 age groups: < 40 years, 40-44 years, 45-49 years, 50-54 years, 55-59 years, 60-64 years and > 65 years. RESULTS: The mean and standard deviation of age were 50.0 ± 9.7 years. In 48.8% of cases, the coronary calcium score was superior to zero, with a non-gaussian distribution and a large variation for the same age group. There was a direct correlation between age and coronary calcium scores (r = 0.4, p < 0.01). Except in the comparison between individuals in age groups 60-64 and 55-60 years old and below and above 65, the greater the age group, the greater the median scores of coronary calcium (p < 0.0001). Coronary calcium scores are reported according to the percentiles 25, 50, 75 and 90 for the age groups. CONCLUSION: This study, first to report the distribution of coronary calcium scores in a sample of white Brazilian men, may be useful for stratifying the risk of coronary events. Keywords: electron-beam computed tomography, coronary artery disease, diagnosis
Coronary Atherosclerosis is one of the major causes of mortality in our environment(1). The atherosclerotic disease is multifactorial and the identification of high risk individuals for coronary events is extremely important, since preventive therapies, such as a change of life style and the use of drugs, for example statins and acetylsalicylic acid, significantly reduce clinical events and mortality(2). Classically, risk stratification of coronary events is done through the analysis of the risk factors set. Meanwhile, epidemiological data shows that about 25% of individuals who died of sudden cardiac causes did not present previous symptoms and even the classic tools for assessing the risk of coronary events, such as the Framingham scores, have limitations in identifying individuals with a high risk (3, 4). It is proven that around 50% of coronary deaths and most myocardial infarctions occur in individuals considered with low and intermediate risk, according to clinical and laboratorial parameters (3). Thus, assessment of subclinical atherosclerosis through imaging techniques may be useful for risk stratification, since there is evidence that the atherosclerotic plaque load correlates with the risk of coronarian events (5-6). Coronary artery calcification (Fig. 1) detected by the ultrafast computed tomography, or tomography of emission electrons has a correlation with the atherosclerotic plaque burden on histological, angiographic and intravascular ultrasound studies 7-10. The ultrafast computed tomography is a noninvasive and very sensitive method for the detection of the calcification of the coronary artery7. There is evidence that coronary calcification by ultrafast CT might be a red flag for clinical events of coronary artery disease, independent from risk factors for atherosclerosis (11-14). Coronary calcium scores have yet to be described for the Brazilian population. The goal of this study was to describe the distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a population sample of white, asymptomatic Brazilian men, subjected to ultra-fast computed tomography evaluation.     Methods
2253 asymptomatic men have been evaluated, from the cardiovascular point of view, and subjected to ultrafast computed tomography at Unidade Diagnóstica Jardins do Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, from November 1999 to April 2002. The indication for the exam was made by doctors of patients in routine assessments. Individuals with a clinical diagnosis of coronary artery disease or subjected to angiography, revascularization through catheter or coronary artery revascularization were excluded from the study. CT scans were performed with an ImatronR C-150 (Imatron Corporation, San Francisco, California) tomograph and the imaging procedure was obtained by axial heart cuts with a thickness of 3mm, at the end of diastole and triggered by the electrocardiogram, during a temporary range of 100ms, during the inspiratory pause. The image of two contiguous pixels was considered coronary artery calcification, with an attenuation coefficient superior to 130 Hounsfield units. The coronary calcium score was calculated using the Agatston15 method, multiplying the calcification area in square millimeters by a factor of 1, 2, 3 or 4, depending on the attenuation coefficients determined by the calcium. Factor 1 was used when these coefficients were between 130 and 199 Hounsfield units; factor 2, when between 200 and 299 Hounsfield units; factor 3, when between 300 and 399; and factor 4, for coefficients greater than 400 Hounsfield units. The coronary calcium score was the sum of all scores obtained from all coronary arteries in all tomographic cuts. It was calculated through the computer program AccuscoreR (AccuImage Diagnostics Corporation, USA). However, the program only performed calculations after the presence of calcium had been confirmed by the operator. Data was divided into 7 age groups: < 40 years-old, 40-44 years-old, 45-49 years-old, 50-54 years-old, 55-59 years-old, 60-64 years-old and > 65 years-old. The mean, median and standard deviation were calculated and descriptive statistics created for each of the age groups using the programs Microsoft ExcelR (Microsoft, Brazil) and Sigmastat for WindowsR (Jandel Scientific, USA). The Gaussian (or non-Gaussian) distribution of data was evaluated by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Age correlation with the values ​​of coronary calcium scores was performed by the Spearman test. Its values ​​of coronary calcium scores were also compared between each other on different age groups, by the nonparametric test of repeated measures variance analysis (RM-ANOVA) and through the Dunn test. The value of p bicaudal, inferior to 0.05, was considered significant.   Results
The mean, standard deviation and the age range was of 50 ± 9.7 years (22-88 years). The incidence of the coronary calcium score being superior to zero occurred in 48.8% of cases. In Table I we observe the mean, median and standard deviation of the coronary calcium scores that had a non-Gaussian distribution and showed great variation for the same age group. There was a direct correlation between age and the coronary calcium score (r = 0.4, p < 0.01). Aside from comparing individuals in the age groups between 60-64 years, below 55-60 years and above 65, the greater the age group the greater the median of coronary calcium scores (p < 0.0001). In table II, the coronary calcium scores are separated according to the distribution of the percentiles 25, 50, 75 and 90.         Discussion
The determination of the coronary calcification by ultrafast computed tomography has been used on preventive cardiology to assess the risk of coronary events on asymptomatic individuals (7). Coronary calcium scores are the way to systematize these values ​​with diagnostic and prognostic intention. This study is the first to describe the coronary calcium scores assessed by ultrafast computed tomography in a Brazilian population sample. Previously in literature there were descriptions of coronary calcium scores only for US populations (13, 16, 17). The description of coronary calcium scores is necessary for our population, since not only does the prevalence of coronary artery disease differ in our country, but also its aforementioned ethnic composition. The distribution of coronary calcium scores shows a high variation of its values, being that their distribution does not follow the Gauss curve. The standard deviations are larger than the average, what makes the classic presentation of mean and standard deviation inadequate. Nonetheless, for descriptive purposes, they were included on the table. The median should be the best way to present the data. In all of the studied age groups, 50% of people had a score equal to zero, fact that justifies the median values ​​of Table I. Just as in other populations, the coronary artery calcium scores increased with age (13, 16, 17), however, due to the non-Gaussian distribution and the small number of individuals in the age ranges superior to 60 years in our sample, a better comparison of calcification of the coronary artery between this range and the range immediately below and above was jeopardized. Although the medians are higher, there was no statistical difference in these values. It is important to note that despite this apparent limitation, there is evidence that greater specificity for detecting the risk of coronary events is in the evaluation of coronary calcification between the ages of 35 to 55 or at 60 years old (7). In our study, 75% of individuals had less than 60 years of age. Although age is an important determinant of the coronary calcium score, other risk factors for atherosclerosis, such as smoking, cholesterol, high blood pressure, among others, were not evaluated in this study and in studies that described coronary calcium scores in the United States population by multivariate analysis. In the tomographic images obtained by ultrafast computed tomography, coronary calcification can be easily identified due to presenting a density that is 8 times higher than that of the surrounding tissues (18). The ultra fast CT scanner ImatronR differs from the conventional and modern helicals, since its image acquisition rate is 50-100 ms, that is, 3 to 6 times faster, which reduces the risk of artifacts and makes this device the gold standard for evaluating coronary calcification (7). A strong correlation between coronary calcification, identified by fluoroscopy or through anatomopathological exam, and coronary artery disease, has been known since 1961 (19, 20). More recent studies suggest that the calcium was already present in the atherosclerosic plaque in its earlier stages, when the lesion is constituted from streaks of fatty tissue only (21). The calcium at this stage can't be identified through the use of current non-invasive methods. As the lesion progresses, with the addition of cholesterol, inflammatory cells and fibrous tissue, calcium accumulates in the form of boards on the basis of the intimate and becomes identifiable by ultrafast computed tomography. Simons e cols. (22) analyzed sequential histological cuts, from the initial portions to the caudal portions of 525 coronary arteries. Although calcium was not in all lesions, an important correlation between the amount of calcium and the amount of atherosclerosis that exists in each coronary artery was found. Injuries without calcification were almost clear from any significant obstruction of the coronary lumen in their totallity, showing that the identification and quantification of calcium allows, in a way, the measure of a coronary artery disease degree. A similar study from Rumberger e cols., correlating the quantification of coronary calcium by ultrafast computed tomography in necropsy hearts and histopathological quantification, confirmed this data (23). Angiographic and coronary ultrasound studies have also shown that coronary calcification is correlated with the atherosclerotic plaque load (8-10) and that this in turn correlates with the risk of coronarian events (5-6). Several studies, in individuals who both were and weren't assymptomatic for coronary artery disease, have shown correlation of coronary calcification with vessel light obscrution (9, 18, 24). Even though the sensitivity of ultrafast computed tomography for the diagnosis of coronary obstruction sits around 95%, its specificity is around 66% (24), fact which harms its role in screening coronary obstructions. The primary utility of ultrafast tomography should reside in the ability to identify individuals with or without significant risk of coronary events, in a way that is independent from the classic risk factors (3).  American data shows that about 50% of coronary events originate from the intermediate risk range, according to the use of clinical data for stratification, such as data obtained from the Framingham tables. Thus, it is necessary that other tests are used to achieve a better risk stratification of coronary arrests. Data from literature have demonstrated that the presence of coronary calcification is associated with an increased risk of coronary events (11-14), whilst its absence is associated with a risk of coronary events of virtually zero, in follow-up studies spanning from 3 to 5 years (25). Coronary calcium scores should have their primary application in stratifying the risk of clinical events. A recent meta-analysis showed that patients with coronary calcium scores above the median had a relative risk of death from coronary artery disease or myocardial infarction that is 4.2 times higher (95% CI 1.6 to 11.13) when compared to individuals with a coronary calcium score that is lower than the median (26). There is evidence that individuals with a coronary calcium score above the percentile 67, 75 and 80, for sex and age, which were the upper percentiles depending on the assessed samples, showed an annual absolute risk of myocardial infarction and or death from coronary artery disease of 1.8%, 2.3% and 4.5%, putting these patients in a high risk range. Another option proposed in a prospective study for accessing the risk of coronary events was the use of absolute scores rather than distributing these according to age and sex (11). Classically, coronary calcium scores above 400 are associated with an increased risk of coronary obstructions and clinical events (27). Arad e cols. (11) in a follow-up of 1,172 individuals for 3 years, showed that a coronary calcium score superior to 160 was associated with a chance ratio of 20.2 times for an individual presenting a myocardial infarction or death from coronary artery disease. These findings were independent from classic risk factors. However, in a population at a high risk of coronary events according to clinical data, coronary calcium scores were not higher than the Framingham scores in identifying the individuals who had clinical events (28). This data was contested due to inadequate methodology of the exams performed by Detrano e cols. Recently, Grundy29 proposed the association of coronary calcium scores with Framingham scores for risk stratification of coronary events. It is known that age is one of the primary risk markers for coronary events associated with increased atherosclerotic plaque load. The determination of more or less coronary calcification, as indicating the amount of atherosclerotic plaque, would reduce or increase the points attributed to age in the Framingham tables. The most notable criticism against prospective studies with ultrafast computed tomography is the small number of clinical events during the follow-up, limiting the discriminative power of these studies (25). Similarly, criticisms are made regarding the indiscriminate use of exams without medical indication, based on the Bayes theory, since the use of ultrafast computed tomography in low clinical risk individuals, exceptionally, would identify individuals under high risk of coronary events (31). Consequently, the costs of an indiscriminate evaluation become prohibitive from the public health point of view. The MESA study with more than 6,500 individuals from diverse ethnic groups, held in the USA, compared ultrafast computed tomography, evaluation of intimate relationship/average carotid artery by ultrasound, and clinical risk scores to determine whether the non-invasive techniques were superior, complementary or lower than the clinical assessment of coronary risk events 25. In conclusion, based on the current literature, when properly indicated the evaluation of coronary calcium scores is useful in the stratification of the coronary risk. Once the individuals that are under high risk of events have been identified, we propose that they get treated according to current guidelines for prevention, especially in regards to the use of statins and acetylsalicylic acid (2). To follow up our work, become necessary determinations in women, a larger number of men at older ages and the study of different population social class (middle class individuals), a comparison of coronary calcium scores described in Brazilian populations to the ones of US since these are the standards available in the literature. In case there are differences, a prospective study on the value of arterial coronary calcification in our population would be of great importance. Our study is a beginning for this process. We emphasize, as limitations, the predominance of middle class caucasian individuals in our population. Studies are being conducted on a larger number of individuals of both sexes, and from different races and social classes.   