 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Describe the distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a population of white brazilian men asymptomatic subjects submitted to evaluation by ultrafast computed tomography. METHODS: the study assessed 2.253 men aged 22 to 88 years, undergoing examination, ct in an appliance ImatronR C150 for the detection of coronary artery calcium. The data were separated into 7 age groups: < 40 years, 40-44 years, 45-49 years, 50-54 years, 55-59 years, 60-64 years, and >65 years. RESULTS: THE mean and standard deviation of age were 50.0 ± 9.7 years. In by 48.8% of the cases occurred incidence of coronary artery calcium score was > zero, which presented a non-Gaussian distribution and showed a large variation for the same age group. There was direct correlation between age and the coronary artery calcium scores (r=0.4, p<0.01). Except for the comparison between the individuals in the age groups 60-64 years, below 55-60 years, and above 65 years, the older the age group the greater the medians of the coronary artery calcium scores (p<0.0001). Coronary artery calcium scores are reported according to the percentiles 25,50,75 and 90 for the age groups. CONCLUSION: in This study, the first to report the distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a sample of white brazilian men, it may be useful for stratifying the risk of coronary events. Key words: computed tomography electron beam, coronary artery disease, diagnostic coronary atherosclerosis is one of the main causes of mortality in our meio1. The atherosclerotic disease is multifactorial and the identification of individuals at high risk for coronary events is extremely important, since preventive therapies, such as lifestyle change and use of drugs, such as statins and acetylsalicylic acid significantly reduce clinical events and mortalidade2. Classically, the risk stratification of coronary events is made through the analysis of a set of risk factors. However, epidemiological data show that about 25% of individuals who died suddenly of cardiac causes had no previous symptoms, and even the classical tools for the evaluation of the risk of coronary events, such as the Framingham scores, have limitations in the identification of individuals at high risco3,4. It is proven that about 50% of the coronary deaths and the majority of myocardial infarctions occur in individuals considered as low to intermediate risk according to clinical parameters and laboratoriais3. In this way, the assessment of atherosclerosis subclinical by means of imaging methods could be useful in risk stratification, since there is evidence that the load of the atherosclerotic plaque correlates with the risk of events coronarianos5-6. The coronary artery calcification (fig. 1), detected by ultrafast computed tomography, or ct scan of the electron emission custody correlation with the load of the atherosclerotic plaque in studies histological, angiographic, and ultrasound intravascular7-10. Ultrafast computed tomography is a method of non-invasive and very sensitive for detection of calcification of the artery coronária7. There is evidence that the degree of coronary artery calcification by ultrafast computed tomography may be a risk marker of clinical events in coronary artery disease, independent of risk factors for aterosclerose11-14. Until the moment have not been described in the coronary artery calcium scores in the brazilian population. The aim of this study was the description of the distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a population sample of brazilian men, white, asymptomatic, submitted to evaluation by ultrafast computed tomography. Methods Were assessed 2.253 men asymptomatic from the cardiovascular point of view, subjected to ultrafast computed tomography in the Diagnostic Unit Gardens of the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, in the period from November/99 to April/02. The indication of the examination was made by doctors of patients in routine assessment. Individuals with a clinical diagnosis of coronary artery disease or undergoing angiography, revascularization by catheter or coronary artery bypass grafting were excluded from the study. The tomographies were performed in a ct scanner ImatronR C-150 (Imatron Coporation, San Francisco, California, usa) and the images were obtained from axial sections of the heart with the thickness of 3mm, at the end of diastole triggered by electrocardiogram, in a time interval of 100ms during the inspiratory pause. It was considered coronary artery calcification image 2 contiguous pixels with an attenuation coefficient > 130 Hounsfield units. The coronary artery calcium score was calculated by the method of Agatston15, multiplying the calcification area in square millimeters by a factor 1, 2, 3, or 4, depending on the attenuation coefficients determined by calcium. The factor 1 was used when these coefficients are between 130 to 199 Hounsfield units, the factor of 2, when between 200 and 299 Hounsfield units; factor 3 when 300 and 399, and a factor of 4 for coefficients greater than 400 Hounsfield units. The coronary artery calcium score was the sum of all the scores obtained in all coronary arteries in all cuts of the ct scan and calculated using the computer program AccuscoreR (AccuImage Diagnostics Corporation, USA). However, the calculations were only performed after confirming the presence of calcium by the operator. The data were separated into 7 age groups: < 40 years, 40-44 years, 45-49 years, 50-54 years, 55-59 years, 60-64 years, and > 65 years. Was performed descriptive statistics and calculated the means, medians, and standard deviations in each of the age ranges for the intermediate group with Microsoft ExcelR (Microsoft, Brazil) and Sigmastat for Rreparar (Jandel Scientific, USA). The Gaussian distribution or not of the data was assessed by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Age was correlated with the values of coronary artery calcium scores by the test of Spearmann and their values of coronary artery calcium scores were also compared between each other in the different age groups by the test of analysis of variance of repeated measures (RM-ANOVA) non-parametric and by the Dunn test. Was considered significant, the p-value two-tailed < 0,05. Results The mean, standard deviation and range of age was 50 ± 9.7 years (22-88 years). The incidence of coronary artery calcium score was > zero in 48.8% of cases. Table I shows the means, medians, and standard deviations of the coronary artery calcium scores that showed a non-Gaussian distribution and showed a large variation for the same age group. There was direct correlation between age and the coronary artery calcium score (r=0.4, p<0.01). With the exception of the comparison between the individuals in the age groups 60-64 years, below 55-60 years, and above 65 years, the older the age group the greater the medians of the coronary artery calcium scores (p<0.0001). In table II, coronary artery calcium scores are separated according to the distribution of the percentiles 25, 50, 75, and 90. Discussion The determination of coronary artery calcification by ultrafast computed tomography has been used in cardiology, preventive assessment of the risk of coronary events in individuals assintomáticos7. Coronary artery calcium scores are a way to systematize these values with the intention of diagnostic and prognostic. This study is the first to describe the coronary artery calcium scores assessed by ultrafast computed tomography in a brazilian population sample. Previously there was description in the literature of coronary artery calcium scores only for populations of EUA13,16,17. The description of coronary artery calcium scores is necessary in our population, since not only the prevalence of coronary artery disease that differs in our country, but also its ethnic composition, cited previously. The distribution of coronary artery calcium scores in a large variation of their values, being that the distribution does not follow the Gaussian curve. The standard deviations are larger than the average, which makes the classical presentation in the form of mean and standard deviations become inadequate. However, for descriptive purposes, were placed on the table. In this way, the median would be the best way to show the data. In all age groups assessed, 50% of the individuals had a score equal to zero, which justifies the values of the medians in table I. in The same way as in other populations, coronary artery calcium scores increased with the idade13,16,17, however, due to the non-Gaussian distribution and the small number of individuals in the age groups > 60 years in our sample was impaired for a better comparison of coronary artery calcification between that track and the tracks immediately above and below. Although the medians are larger, there was no statistical difference in these values. It is important to note that despite this apparent limitation, there is evidence that the greater specificity for detecting the risk of coronary events is in the evaluation of coronary artery calcification between the age groups of 35 to 55 years of age or 60 anos7. In our study, 75% of the individuals were less than 60 years of age. Although age is an important determinant of the coronary artery calcium score, other risk factors for atherosclerosis, such as smoking, cholesterol, high blood pressure, among others, were not assessed in this study and in other studies that have described the coronary artery calcium scores in the U.S. population by multivariate analysis. In the images tomographic obtained by ultrafast computed tomography, coronary artery calcification can be easily identified by the density 8 times higher than that of the tissues circunvizinhos18. The ct scanner is ultra-fast ImatronR differs from the conventional and modern twist, since its speed of image acquisition is 50-100ms, ie, 3 to 6 times faster, which reduces the risk of artifacts, and makes this device the gold standard for assessment of arterial calcification coronariana7. A strong correlation between the degree of coronary artery calcification identified by fluoroscopy or by pathological examination and coronary artery disease is known since 196119,20. Recent research suggests that calcium is already present in the atherosclerotic plaque in its early stages, when the lesion is composed only of striae gordura21. However, in this stage, the calcium can not be identified by means of the current noninvasive methods. As the lesion progresses, with the addition of cholesterol, inflammatory cells, and tissue basement membranes, the calcium accumulates in the form of plates, at the base of the intima and becomes identifiable by ultrafast computed tomography. Simons and cols.22 analyzed histological sections and sequential, from the initial to the caudal portions of 525 coronary arteries. Although calcium was not present in all lesions, an important correlation was found between the amount of calcium and the amount of atherosclerosis in each artery. The lesions without calcification, almost in its entirety, did not present significant obstruction of the coronary lumen, showing that identification of calcium and their quantification allow, in a certain way, to scale the degree of existing coronary artery disease. A similar study by Rumberger and cols., correlating the quantification of coronary artery calcium by ultrafast computed tomography in the hearts of necropsy and histopathologic quantification, confirmed these dados23. Studies angiographic and ultrasound in coronary artery also showed that coronary artery calcification correlates with the load of the plate aterosclerótica8-10 and this, in turn, correlates with the risk of events coronarianos5-6. Several studies in asymptomatic or symptomatic individuals for coronary artery disease have shown a correlation of coronary artery calcification and obstruction of the light of vaso9,18,24. However, although the sensitivity of ultrafast ct for diagnosis of coronary artery obstruction reaches 95%, its specificity is around 66% 24, a fact that undermines their role in the triage of coronary artery obstructions. The main utility of ultrafast ct would be on the ability to identify individuals with high risk for coronary events, independently of risk factors clássicos3. American data show that approximately 50% of coronary events originate in the so-called intermediate risk range, according to the use of clinical data for stratification, such as, for example, that made by the Framingham tables. Thus, it is necessary that other tests be used for a better stratification of the risk of coronary events. Data from the literature have shown that the presence of coronary artery calcification is associated with a greater risk of events coronarianos11-14, but its absence is associated with a risk of coronary events, virtually zero, in follow-up studies from 3 to 5 anos25. Coronary artery calcium scores have their major usefulness in stratifying the risk of clinical events. A recent meta-analysis showed that individuals with coronary artery calcium scores above the median had a relative risk of death by coronary artery disease or myocardial infarction were 4.2 times (95% CI 1.6-11,13), when compared to individuals with coronary artery calcium score below the mediana26. There is evidence that individuals with coronary artery calcium scores above the 67th, 75, and 80 for sex and age, which are the percentiles higher depending on the case series evaluated, had an annual absolute risk of myocardial infarction and or death due to coronary artery disease 1.8%, and 2.3% and 4.5%, placing these patients in the range of high risk. Another option proposed in a prospective study for risk assessment of coronary events was the use of absolute scores and not their distribution by age and sexo11. Classically, the coronary artery calcium scores above 400 are associated with increased risk of coronary artery obstructions and event clínicos27. Arad and colleagues.11 in a follow-up to 1,172 individuals over 3 years, showed that a coronary artery calcium score > 160 was associated with an reason of chance 20.2-a person developing a myocardial infarction or death from coronary artery disease. These findings were independent of the classical risk factors. However, in a high-risk population for coronary events according to clinical data, coronary artery calcium scores were not higher than the Framingham scores to identify the individuals who had events clínicos28. These data have been disputed due to the inappropriate methodology of the examinations performed by Detrano and colleagues. Recently, Grundy29 has proposed the association of coronary artery calcium scores with the Framingham scores for the risk stratification of coronary events. It is known that age is one of the main markers of risk of coronary events, associated with the increase in the load of the atherosclerotic plaque. The determination of a higher or lower degree of coronary artery calcification, as an indicator of the amount of atherosclerotic plaque, reduces or increases the points assigned to age in the Framingham tables. The main criticism of prospective studies with ultrafast computed tomography is the small number of clinical events occurring during follow-up, limiting the discriminating power of these estudos25. In the same way, criticisms are made to the indiscriminate use of examinations without a medical indication, based on the theory of Bayes, since the use of ultrafast computed tomography in individuals at low clinical risk, uniquely, identify individuals at high risk of events coronarianos31. Consequently, the costs of an indiscriminate assessment become prohibitive from the point of view of public health. The study TABLE with more than 6,500 individuals from various ethnic groups, conducted in the USA, comparing the ultrafast computed tomography assessment of the carotid intima/media ratio on ultrasound, and clinical scores for risk to determine if the non-invasive techniques are superior, complementary, or inferior to the clinical assessment of risk of events coronarianos25. In conclusion, based on the current literature, when well indicated, the assessment of coronary artery calcium scores is useful in the stratification of coronary risk. Once you have identified individuals at high risk of events, we propose that these be treated according to the current prevention guidelines, especially with regard to the use of statins and acid acetilsalicílico2. To follow our work, make necessary determinations in women, the largest number of men in older ages and of different social classes of the population studied (individuals of the middle class), comparison of coronary artery calcium scores that are described in populations in brazil to the U.S., since these are the patterns available in the literature. If there are differences, it would be important to a prospective study of the value of coronary artery calcification in our population. Our study is a beginning to this process. We emphasize, as limitations, the majority of the individuals are caucasian and of middle class in our population. Studies are being conducted on a greater number of individuals of both sexes, of races and different social classes. 