OBJECTIVE: To verify the findings of computed tomography of multiple detectors (MDCT) are associated with the clinical and laboratory tests routinely used in late evaluation of children undergoing surgical treatment of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (CATVP). METHODS: From January 2002 to December 2007, 12 patients undergoing CATVP were evaluated with history, physical examination, chest radiography, electrocardiography, echocardiography and MDCT. specific changes in each of these tests were identified and compared with the qualitative findings of MDCT. RESULTS: Eleven patients were in functional class I (NYHA), three showed unspecific woodwinds, three were below the 15th percentile for height and weight development. Chest radiography, two patients had changes in lung and three fields, a slight increase in heart size. The electrocardiogram, one patient had right ventricular overload and, junctional rhythm. All echocardiograms were within normal limits, except in one patient with stenosis of the superior vena cava and right atrium. MDCT was totally normal in four patients, three showed compression of the pulmonary veins and the four considered significant size reduction, which correlated with other findings. Thus, the MDCT to demonstrate anatomical changes when compared to changes in the physical examination or other additional tests showed a sensitivity of 87.5%, specificity 75%, positive predictive value 87.5%, negative predictive value of 75% and accuracy of 83.3%. CONCLUSION: In the late follow-up of patients undergoing surgical correction of CATVP, MDCT can provide valuable information and complement the diagnosis of possible anatomical and functional changes. Key words: Tomography. Congenital heart defects / surgery. Treatment outcome.     INTRODUCTION The anomalous connection of the pulmonary venous return, commonly known as total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (CATVP) is a rare congenital heart disease encompasses a group of amendments in which the pulmonary veins (PV) connect directly to the systemic venous circulation and not the left atrium (LA) [1]. According to the anatomical characteristics, can be classified into supracardiac, heart, infracardiac or mixed, it is possible the use of various surgical techniques for the correction of the defect [2,3]. Regardless of the technique used, it is known that the PV can be engaged and do not present an adequate development, tissue either by the constitution of the common pulmonary vein (VPC) or suture lines used during the procedure. This situation is one of the most worrying late complications, it has clinically important consequences and compromises the prognosis [4,5]. Typically, these patients are accompanied with clinical evaluation, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG) and Holter, echocardiography beyond that demonstrates or suggests with color Doppler the presence or not of size reduction of PV [4-7]. The gold standard definitive diagnosis of this complication is still the hemodynamic study. But recently, magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography of multiple detectors (MDCT) have been employed with greater emphasis on congenital heart defects to replace the invasive procedure [8-10]. This fact aroused our attention to see if the MDCT findings are associated with the clinical and laboratory tests routinely used in the evaluation of children undergoing surgical treatment of CATVP because, until as we know, this is a diagnostic tool that does not it was applied to late follow-up of this specific group of patients.   METHODS Between January 2002 and December 2007, were operated in 1492 patients with congenital heart defects, 16 (1.07%) with CATVP. All in São José Base Hospital Black River Regional Medical School Foundation (FUNFARME) / Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto (FAMERP). The project study was submitted to the Scientific and Ethics Committee for Analysis of Research Project of the Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto, was approved by Opinion No 013/2009. The Consent and Informed was signed by all the leaders who participated in the study. Of the 16 patients, 3 (18.75%) died in the same hospital operation, being considered hospital death and can not attend for evaluation due to geographical difficulties. The survival of the total group of 16 patients in 2000 days was 81%, with a confidence interval (CI) of 95% from 61.2% to 100%. Thus, 12 (92.31%) patients were evaluated and later constituted the study group. The mean follow-up time of these 12 patients was 3.73 ± 1.33 years and median of 3.96 (1.34 to 5.43) years. The average age at the time of MDCT was 3.95 ± 1.32 years. The information found in the records and the intraoperative group data are presented in Tables 1 and 2.     Late evaluation was based on history, physical examination, chest X-ray, ECG, echocardiography and MDCT. The history consisted of information about the functional class according to the New York Heart Association (NYHA) and the use of drugs. Physical examination was focused on cardiac auscultation and anthropometric measures weight and height. Chest radiography, analyzed the transparency of the lung fields, the hemidiaphragm, the size of the area and other changes, when present. ECG provided the rhythm and heart rate, PR interval, QT and QTc, the axes of the P wave and the QRS complex, and other changes. Echocardiography was performed with appliance brand Phillips, HD11 model (Bothell, WA, USA), with electronic transducer pediatric multifrequency 3-8 MHz, one-dimensional mode, two-dimensional, pulsed Doppler, continuous and colorful. Standard echocardiographic were obtained. With the pulsed Doppler was possible to measure the velocities of peak venous blood flow in the right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV), called S-wave, D and A. The S wave indicated the systolic antegrade flow, the D wave, diastolic antegrade flow, and wave, retrograde flow during atrial contraction. In the other three PVs, the measures were not carried out by technical difficulties inherent in the method. Also with the help of Doppler was calculated systolic pressure RV (RVSP) by physiological tricuspid regurgitation and the mean pressure in the pulmonary artery (PMAP). Both the RSPV, as in the other PV and around the AE was repeatedly searched with the aid of the Doppler locations with the presence of possible size reduction, this being considered when the flow rate was greater than 2.0 m / s and pulsed Doppler or color Doppler flow when there was turbulence [4,5,11,12]. Chest MDCT was performed in unit of GE ® brand (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI), lighspeed model Multicut (multislice) of 16 channels, with images obtained at intervals between 0.625 mm cuts. With the child in fasting peripheral vein was punctured with a Jelco 22 or 24 in upper member and the midazolam dose of 0.1 mg / kg propofol and 0.5% of 2 to 4 mg / kg. Mean blood pressure non-invasively and pulse oximetry were constantly monitored and the child kept under spontaneous ventilation with 100% oxygen mask with 2 to 4 l / min. The standardization of tests was possible to be all performed by a single radiologist and a single technician in radiology, accompanied by an anesthesiologist, pediatric, cardiovascular surgeon and nurses. The contrast was used Optiray® 350 (injectable loversol 74%), containing 350 mg / ml of organically bound iodine, or a non-ionic contrast agent of low toxicity and osmolarity (Mallinickrodt Inc. - Raleigh, NC - USA). The dose was based on the weight of the child, according to manufacturer's instructions and administered in the least amount possible to properly obtain the images. They obtained images of axial slices in helical mode, which allowed large volumes of data to be reformatted images in the sagittal, coronal and oblique planes. With this volume of images acquired by the axial, it was possible to perform three-dimensional reformations and reconstructions (3D) volumetric called MIP (maximum intensity projection) reconstructions and colorful 3D Rendering called volume. The diameter of the mouth of each pulmonary vein was measured essentially based on axial cuts, sagittal, coronal and oblique, in the short and long axes, in order to get the area and check possible size reductions compared to a qualitative description. With the diameter of each pulmonary vein, the area was calculated and indexed by their patient's body surface, in order to standardize the measurements and can compare them. It considered the possibility of size reduction when the value was at least one average standard deviation of the areas of pulmonary vein studied. The measures were reconfirmed in three-dimensional reconstructions and associated with descriptive findings, but with illustrative and non-scientific purposes. AE was measured in length (craniocaudal), width (lateral-lateral) and depth (anteroposterior), being possible to calculate the volume by multiplying the measurements and in the same way as for PV, it was indexed to body surface of the patient. It considered the possibility that the AE be little developed when the value was at least one standard deviation lower than the average volumes. These data were compared with the descriptive findings. The lungs were analyzed for the presence of parenchymal injury, and vascular markings signals that indicate abnormalities. With the images obtained and measurements of PV and AE, a single observer, radiologist, experienced in congenital heart disease, analyzed the morphological patterns descriptively (qualitatively) and all data were correlated with the clinical history findings, physical examination, chest radiography , ECG and echocardiography. In the statistical analysis, the continuous quantitative variables with Gaussian distribution were represented and analyzed as mean ± standard deviation. Continuous quantitative variables without Gaussian distribution were represented as median (25-75 percentile). All qualitative variables were represented as absolute number (percent of total). Survival was expressed by Kaplan-Meier curve and its significance with the log rank test test with Prism 4.0 for Windows program. The alpha error admitted for statistical significance was 5%. Sensitivity was calculated, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and accuracy of MDCT in relation to the clinical evaluation and tests ordered routinely in the late follow-up. gold standard was considered when at least one of these had been changing.   RESULTS The sample of 12 patients is presented in a descriptive manner, in order to allow better analysis of the data found. The MHDF patients, EEM, GVR and LLF were carriers of CATVP type supracardiac; LJD, MICP and EBA, heart type; JDSA, HVDS, KCRM and JRM, infracardiac type; and VSF, mixed type. All patients were in functional class I (NYHA) except one (LJD) with CATVP heart type, which presented gauge reduction of PV was reoperation and is acetylsalicylic acid. Another patient (JDSA) with CATVP infracardiac had seizures in the postoperative period and, although no more symptoms after discharge, still makes use of carbamazepine. Cardiac auscultation was within normal limits, except in three patients who had nonspecific murmurs (MICP, HVDS and KCRM). Of the eight male patients, five (62.50%) were below the 50th percentile of body mass index (BMI), and three (37.50%) below the 15th percentile. All patients were female with a BMI above the 85th percentile. Chest radiography, most children had pleuropulmonary fields with normal transparency, free diaphragmatic domes and cardiac area within normal limits. Two patients (GVR and HVDS) had a slight increase in heart size by visual impression, little discordant ICT, and in three children was noted prominence of the right cavities (GVR, HVDS and JRM). In one patient (EEM) was observed subsegmentar opacity in the right lung base, adjacent to the diaphragm, may represent atelectasis subsegmentar. Another patient (LJD) presented hypertransparency the left lung, by reduction of the vascular markings. Most EKGs showed up within the normal range, with discrete electrical conduction disorders, such as changing the anterior septal ventricular repolarization, conduction disturbance of the right branch and right ventricular overload, apparently without clinical significance. Echocardiography demonstrated that the measurement of blood flow velocity in the RSPV was less than 2 m / s in all patients, and the highest D waves found were 1 m / s and 1.3 m / s, and in patients LLF MICP . There was also no other size reduction in PV, as in anastomosis between the SVC and the AE. The RVSP was considered normal in all patients, and the highest found in LJD patient (37 mmHg). The PMAP can not be measured in two patients, and LJD GVR. In all other patients, it was also normal MPAP. In one patient (LJD), there was narrowing at the mouth of the VCS with AD, with venous flow velocity of 1.89 m / s, considered by echocardiography as discrete gauge reduction. We were also observed in this important patient dilation of the azygos vein and blood flow in the opposite direction to normal. Analysis of MDCT of each patient provided descriptively many details of the anatomical changes in PV, VPC, AE and lung parenchyma, among others. Table 3 provides an overview of the sites diagnosed as outside the normal range. The mean measurements of PV indexed by body surface area and their respective standard deviations were RUPV 113.36 ± 56.49 mm 2 / m 2, VPID 98.72 ± 42.26 mm 2 / m 2, LSPV 70.05 ± 30.94 mm2 / m2 LIPV 59.58 ± 31.18 mm2 / m2. When considering at least one standard deviation lower than the average of the values ​​suggested reduction of significant size and therefore could represent anatomical impairment of PV were respectively 56.87 mm2 / m2, 56.46 mm2 / m2, 39.10 mm2 / m2 and 28.40 mm 2 / m 2, as shown in Table 4.     Thus, purely valuing measures, we should consider significant size reduction the LLF patients in RUPV with 20.05 mm2 / m2; LJD, the RIPV, and LIPV LSPV with 41.97 mm2 / m2 26.32 mm2 / m2, 15.50 mm2 / m2; JDSA in RIPV with 41.04 mm2 / m2; HVDS, in VPID and LIPV with 45.89 mm2 / m2 and 21,60 mm2 / m2; and KCRM in RUPV with 39.75 mm2 / m2. The descriptive analysis of the findings by an experienced radiologist in congenital heart disease showed some compression or pulmonary vein caliber reduction in LLF patients LJD, HVDS, KCRM, JRM and VSF. So it was coincidental in four of six patients indicated by the measures. Also, with respect to the affected PV, there was discrepancy in LJD patients JDSA, HVDS and KCRM, suggesting that the measures do not help in the correct diagnosis of the presence or absence of injury PV. The LA volume average indexed by body surface area and its standard deviation was 6.02 ± 1.70 cm3 / m2. Considering at least one average standard deviation it was considered AE undeveloped when the value was less than 4.33 cm3 / m2, a fact that occurred in two patients, GVR and LLF (Table 5). The descriptive analysis of the EA by the radiologist with the aid of MDCT, suggested appropriate development in all patients, indicating that these measures were not helpful.     Four patients had abnormalities suggestive of parenchymal lesions, all with involvement of the left lung: GVR with hypoattenuation the posterior and superior basal segments of the lower lobe and the entire upper lobe, secondary to atelectasis; LJD with reduction of the vascular markings; HVDS with opacity in range in the posterior basal segment of lower lobe and middle lobe, suggesting atelectasis subsegmentar; and JRM with band in opacity in the lower lobe, also suggesting atelectasis subsegmentar (Table 6). Some examples of these findings are presented below to illustrate the morphological definition of capacity of MDCT. In MHDF patient, large stump was found next to the innominate vein (VI), remnant of the vertical vein (VV). The four PV had well developed without size reduction. There was the TP additional signs or lesions in the lung parenchyma. These findings were in accordance with the clinical evaluation and other examinations. In EEM patients, MDCT showed no changes, being concordant with the clinical and laboratory tests, except for chest X-ray, which revealed an image suggestive of atelectasis, but CT rejected that possibility. Therefore, for this patient, MDCT was superior and more enlightening. In GVR patient, it was noted that the descending aorta appeared to compress the SVC along the mouth of the PVs to the left (Figures 1A-1C). The left lung had elongated opacities in the lower and upper lobe, and hypoattenuation in other segments, suggesting increased secondary airspace to atelectasis. The right lung was normal. In clinical evaluation, the patient's height and weight development below the 15th percentile, chest X-ray suggesting cardiac area in the upper limit of normal and showed no lung lesions. The other tests were normal, suggesting that MDCT for this patient was also higher. In LLF patient, the VPC right was presented with long haul intramediastinal, elongated. There size reduction of the distal RUPV, which was small size and reduction (Figure 2). The lung parenchyma was normal. In clinical evaluation, the patient was below the 15th percentile of BMI for age. Chest X-ray and ECG did not indicate changes, however, the echocardiogram, the D wave measured at RUPV was one of the largest found in all patients (1 m / s), and therefore there is agreement between the clinical, echocardiographic and MDCT, even by setting the echocardiographic size reduction was considered when the venous flow velocity was greater than 2 m / s.     In LJD patient who required reoperation for size reduction of PV, noted an important reduction in the diameter of the VPC left and LSPV and LIPV. The PV right, which were expanded with right atrial tissue were normal. The VCS also had important gauge reduction with its mouth in AD, with azygos vein opacification by contrast medium. There was significant reduction in vascular markings of the left lung, despite the tracheobronchial tree have normal appearance. This patient was the only functional class II (NYHA), with height and weight development below the 15th percentile, using acetylsalicylic acid due to the size reduction at the junction of VCS with AD. Radiography was changed to the left and the ECG had right ventricular overload, consistent with the highest RVSP found on echocardiography, with D wave of 0.95 m / s. All these findings were consistent with those found in the MDCT. In MICP patient, it was noted that the PV right drained directly into the left atrium and the left PV converged on a path of VPC, which had no gauge reduction. Had increased the TP gauge, which correlated with clinically systolic murmur left sternal border smooth, without irradiation, but have not noticed changes in chest X-ray, ECG or increased RVSP or PMAP. The D wave was the largest found in all patients, measured at 1.3 m / s and not correlated with images of MDCT, which clearly demonstrate excellent mouth of RUPV in AE. The EBA patient sample anatomy with normal development of PV. Clinical evaluation, as well as all complementary tests indicated no change and MDCT was concordant in all findings (Figure 3).     In JDSA patient, the PV right had long haul, but were symmetrical and without size reductions. The TP and pulmonary arteries had normal development and there was no pulmonary parenchymal lesions signals. These data were consistent with the clinical cardiologic evaluation, chest X-ray and ECG, which were normal. Echocardiogram was found RVSP 36 mmHg, but low PMAP 7 mmHg. The HVDS patient had elongated lower PV, the LIPV being notably smaller caliber than VPID. Apparently, the descending aorta determined compression in the LIPV. The upper PV had normal caliber. The TP and pulmonary arteries were enlarged gauge in relation to the aorta and there was opacity in range in the lower left basal segment and the middle lobe, suggesting atelectasis subsegmentar (Figures 4A-4F). Thus, the MDCT findings reflected the clinical evaluation with systolic murmur at the left sternal border and chest X-ray with increased cardiac area. However, the ECG and echocardiogram showed up unchanged and were not consistent with all other findings. MDCT also showed lung lesions that were absent in the chest X-ray. In KCRM patient, LIPV patient was elongated, with gauge reduction compared to the contralateral vein, apparently suffering compression by the descending aorta. There was no gauge reduction in excess PV. This visual interpretation was different from measurements of PV. In the clinical evaluation, had vibratory systolic murmur at the left sternal border, the chest X-ray was normal, ECG drew attention by junctional rhythm, echocardiogram RVSP 32 mmHg and wave D of 0.96 m / s showed no change. In JRM patients, MDCT found caliber reduction LIPV, and range in opacity in the left lower lobe, with the appearance of atelectasis subsegmentar. In this patient, clinical evaluation was normal, chest X-ray showed only mild prominence of the right cavities. ECG and Echocardiography not point changes. Thus, reduction in the diameter of LIPV may have some association with these findings. In VSF patient, LSPV was short and small arms, the LIPV was elongated and reduction in size compared to other PV. The lung parenchyma was normal. Clinical evaluation and all other examinations were also normal, indicating that MDCT findings should not be interpreted in isolation. Based on the findings above, MDCT showed changes in eight patients, and in seven of these also had changes in at least one of the other variables evaluated, ie clinical assessment or additional tests routinely used, and one of these patients, other counts were normal. In the other four patients, MDCT indicated no change, and in three, it was consistent with the other data analyzed, and a patient, there was a change of other examinations. Thus we find that the MDCT with respect to the clinical evaluation and other analyzed additional tests showed a sensitivity of 87.5% (95% CI 64.6% to 100.0%), specificity of 75.0% (95% 32.6% to 100.0%), positive predictive value 87.5% (95% CI 64.6% to 100.0%), negative predictive value of 75.0% (95% CI 32, 6% to 100.0%) and accuracy of 83.3% (95% CI 62.2% to 100.0%), as briefly shown in Table 6.   DISCUSSION CATVP is a rare disease and case series of 16 patients operated on between 1492 (1.07%) with congenital heart disease in six years, although small, was expected, in line with other large studies, as Bohemia Survival Study, which identified 40 children with CATVP among 815,569 born between 1980 and 1990, and the Baltimore-Washington Infant Study, which found a prevalence of 0.087 per 1000 births invasive [11,12]. The reduction in size of PV, we commonly call stenosis, it is surely the worst late complication that can occur in a patient operated by CATVP. Usually manifests itself quickly, leading the patient reoperation during the first six months after the repair. [13] This need for early approach still remains because of high mortality in centers of excellence around the world [4,5,13-15]. There are several mechanisms that can lead to size reduction of one or more of PV, although it is still incompletely understood [13]. Among these mechanisms are inadequate alignment of the incisions between VPC and AE, causing shrinkage in the anastomosis, which leads to distortion of PV [16]. Also some authors attribute the stenosis and need for reoperation to intimal hyperplasia with inflammatory tissue proliferation thickened [17]. In our study, we observed that in some patients, there was PVs that had size reduction, LIPV being clearly the most affected. Sometimes the PVs were only compressed by the descending aorta, perhaps by its anatomical position during the subsequent training to the pericardial sac. Incisions very close to PV can also lead to stenosis of these veins postoperatively. To avoid this complication, good technical option is opening the VPC toward VV in T or Y, expanding the anastomotic site. This attention should always be on the surgeon's mind and in patients operated in series, such care was observed, avoiding incisions in PV [17]. Some experts claim is suspected that many patients undergoing TAPVC live normally, however, present in a lesion of PV studying totally silent way [17]. This statement leads us to think that MDCT can be a test capable of detecting such changes as early as possible, since in our series changes were observed in completely asymptomatic patients. Important to stress that this was not the purpose of the study, but opens the way for further investigation. The operated CATVP patient progresses, most often clinically asymptomatic, similar to that found in our study, in which 11 (91.66%) had been completely asymptomatic. The heart murmur is usually absent or, if present, is insignificant and non-specific, except in situations where there is still pulmonary hypertension or the presence of any significant residual defect. Heart murmurs observed in the patients in our study were considered not significant because all were + / 6 + or ++ / 6+ at the left sternal border, smooth and radiations. So they would not valued as indicative of a change in routine clinical examination, but it was noted that the three patients with murmurs (MICP, HVDS and KCRM) presented abnormalities on MDCT. It is important to remember that if there is problem in one or more PVs, the probability of blow would be strong indeed minimal, because it is low pressure site, plus the anatomical position is later and therefore hardly audible in the normal auscultation. BMI was much lower than expected in three patients (GVR, LLF and LJD), which were in functional class I, not on medication and with normal cardiac auscultation. These patients showed abnormalities on MDCT, whether or lung compression VPC the descending aorta or decrease in caliber of PV to the left, there is a strong association of height and weight development with the findings of MDCT. Chest X-ray in the late postoperative period should be normal when the patient has not evolved with stenosis of PV or stenosis of the anastomotic region and lung fields should not show changes since the patient did not need long stay in ventilatory assistance, that has caused injuries such as atelectasis or fibrosis. In our study, all patients had abnormal chest radiograph were confirmed by MDCT, but one of the patients who had an image suggestive of atelectasis (EEM) and a CT scan was normal. Soon, there was a strong association between radiographic images and MDCT. The ECG sinus rhythm must show in almost all patients. significant arrhythmias may exist in asymptomatic patients undergoing late CATVP correction, as occurred as KCRM patient whose ECG showed junctional rhythm. Many patients showed no significant changes in the conduction system, for example, anterolateral ventricular repolarization, conduction disturbance or right bundle branch block. These findings are consistent with the literature, which shows a high incidence of sinus node dysfunction and low total atrioventricular block, as well as atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are uncommon significant [18]. In all children assessed by echocardiogram, RVSP was within normal limits, and the patient LJD the highest value since known the patient had lesions in PV left. The PMAP was also within normal limits and did not indicate pulmonary hypertension in any child. The venous flow velocity was measured during the RSPV and although not greater than 1.5 m / s or 2.0 m / s, as suggested by some authors consider that above these values ​​as the presence of PV stenosis in patients LLF and MICP, the speeds were: 1.0 m / 1.3 m / s, compatible with changes found in RUPV in MDCT [4,5]. The correlation of the previously discussed findings were correlated with the findings of MDCT. Chowdhury et al. [19] in 2008, extensive work on CATVP mixed type showed image MDCT on patient evaluation late operated five years ago, to exemplify the anastomosis between the left atrial appendage and the VV still patent. This is the first publication we know of using MDCT in late evaluation of a patient with CATVP. MDCT has been considered as an alternative complementary to echocardiography preoperatively diagnosed CATVP, since often these patients are in unfavorable hemodynamic conditions and hemodynamic study to clarify the anatomy can worsen the clinical picture and provide more risk to life of child. MDCT has the great advantage of being non-invasive and therefore a risk of life almost negligible, except for a possible anaphylactic shock contrast [10]. Kim et al. [9] studied 14 patients with CATVP, demonstrated that the combination of MDCT with three-dimensional reconstruction helped in the diagnosis of CATVP, being a good tool in the preoperative evaluation of neonates and infants [9]. However, it is not enough for adequate visualization of intracardiac structures due to heart rate and generally high respiratory movements. Indeed, it is virtually impossible to stop breathing in children less than eight months when they are not intubated, with this important problem and obstacle to realization of MDCT in neonates. All children in the study were sedated with midazolam and propofol as needed, beyond the fact that they are older, with a mean age of 3.95 ± 1.32 years. In the case presented, the diameters of PV were measured and calculated the LA volume. This had no association with the descriptive findings and therefore we believe that should not be employed. Already, the measures of PV had some degree of association with the descriptive findings, but it was clear that the interpretation by an experienced doctor is more important and can complement the other findings of other examinations. The fact that MDCT be in line with other findings in 10 of 12 patients, ie, the eight modified MDCT seven also with abnormal tests and four with normal MDCT, three with others also normal subjects, makes us believe that MDCT can be used quite safely in the late follow-up of children operated CATVP. discrete and significant morphological changes were observed, being superior for the detection of subtle changes, such as compressive or increase of PV TP with respect to the aorta and presenting association with the significant findings for the tests used in clinical. Notably, VPID was the most affected by compression or presence gauge reduction. Thus, this analysis suggests that it can be used for monitoring of late patients undergoing total anomalous pulmonary venous connection, in order to anticipate clinical worsening, allowing for proper and early assessment, and to anticipate interventions, when needed. The limitations of the study were the small number of patients, which does not allow statistical comparisons. During the study period, there was an increase in the technical details for gain experience of the surgeon and staff. Patients were analyzed only with ECG Holter and not because most live in other states and could not be in town long. The findings of MDCT were not compared the hemodynamic study because ethically would not be right conduct invasive test that theory has some life-threatening to the patient. There is also lack of other work with MDCT or MRI who have belatedly evaluated a series of patients undergoing surgical correction of CATVP.   CONCLUSION In the late follow-up of patients undergoing surgical correction of CATVP, MDCT can provide valuable and complement the diagnosis of possible anatomical and functional changes with sensitivity 87.5%, specificity of 75% and accuracy of 83.3%.   THANKS To all the families who agreed to subject their children to the examination and all members of the Department of Cardiology and Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery of São José do Rio Preto who collaborated directly and indirectly in making this work.   