OBJECTIVE SUMMARY: To verify if the findings of computed tomography of multiple detectors (MDCT) are associated with the clinical and laboratory tests routinely used in late evaluation of children undergoing surgical treatment of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (CATVP). METHODS: From January 2002 to December 2007, 12 patients undergoing CATVP were evaluated with history, physical examination, chest radiography, electrocardiography, echocardiography and MDCT. The specific changes in each of these tests were identified and compared with the qualitative findings of MDCT. RESULTS: Eleven patients were in functional class I (NYHA), three showed unspecific woodwinds, three were below the 15th percentile for height and weight development. As for the chest radiography, two patients had changes in lung and three fields, a slight increase in heart size. As for the electrocardiogram, one patient had right ventricular overload and, junctional rhythm. All echocardiograms were within normal limits, except in one patient with stenosis of the superior cava vein and right atrium. The MDCT was totally normal in four patients, three showed compression of the pulmonary veins and in four it was considered a significant size reduction, which correlated with other findings. Thus, the MDCT can demonstrate anatomical changes when compared to other changes in the physical examination or other additional tests, it showed a sensitivity of 87.5%, specificity 75%, positive predictive value 87.5%, negative predictive value of 75% and accuracy of 83.3%. CONCLUSION: In the late follow-up of patients undergoing surgical correction of CATVP, the MDCT can provide valuable information and complement the diagnosis of possible anatomical and functional changes. Key words: Tomography. Congenital heart defects/surgery. Treatment outcome.     INTRODUCTION The anomalous connection of the pulmonary venous return, commonly known as total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) is a rare congenital heart disease which encompasses a group of alterations in which the pulmonary veins (PV) connect directly to the systemic venous circulation and not to the left atrium (LA) [1]. According to the anatomical characteristics, it can be classified into supracardiac, heart, infracardiac or mixed, the use of various surgical techniques for the correction of the defect [2,3] is possible. Regardless of the technique used, it is known that the PV can be engaged and doesn't present an adequate development, either by the constitution of the common pulmonary tissue vein (VPC) or by suture lines used during the procedure. This situation is one of the most worrying late complications, it has clinically important consequences and compromises the prognosis [4,5]. Typically, these patients are accompanied with clinical evaluation, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG) and Holter, echocardiography beyond that demonstrates or suggests with color Doppler the presence or not of size reduction of PV [4-7]. The gold standard definitive diagnosis of this complication is still the hemodynamic study. But recently, magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography of multiple detectors (MDCT) have been employed with greater emphasis on congenital heart defects to replace the invasive procedure [8-10]. This fact aroused our attention to see if the MDCT findings are associated with the clinical and laboratory tests routinely used in the evaluation of children that underwent surgical treatment of TACPV, because from what we know, this is a diagnostic tool that hasn't been applied yet to late follow-up of this specific group of patients.   METHODS Between January 2002 and December 2007, patients with congenital heart defects, 16 (1.07%) with CATVP were operated in 1492. Everyone in the Hospital Base São José do Rio Preto, Fundação Faculdade Regional de Medicina (FUNFARME)/Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto (FAMERP). The project study was submitted to the Scientific and Ethics Committee for Analysis of the Research Project of the Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, being approved by Opinion No 013/2009. The Consent and Informed term was signed by all the leaders who participated in the study. Of the 16 patients, 3 (18.75%) died in the same hospital operation, being considered hospital death and one could not be present for the evaluation due to geographical difficulties. The survival rate of the total group of 16 patients in 2000 days was of 81%, with a confidence interval (CI) of 95% from 61.2% to 100%. Thus, 12 (92.31%) patients were evaluated and later formed the study group. The average follow-up time of these 12 patients was 3.73 ± 1.33 years, and the median was of 3.96 (1.34 to 5.43) years. The average age at the time of the MDCT was of 3.95 ± 1.32 years. The information found in the records and the intra-operative group data is presented in Tables 1 and 2.     The late evaluation was based on history, physical examination, chest X-ray, ECG, echocardiography and MDCT. The medical history consisted of information about the functional class according to the New York Heart Association (NYHA) and the use of drugs. The physical examination was focused on cardiac auscultation and anthropometric measures: weight and height. The chest radiography analyzed the transparency of the lung fields, the diaphragmatic domes, the size of the area and other changes, while existing. ECG provided the rhythm and heart rate, PR interval, QT and QTc, the axes of the P wave and the QRS complex, and other changes. The echocardiography was performed with the brand Phillips appliance, HD11 model (Bothell, WA, USA), with electronic transducer pediatric multifrequency 3-8 MHz, one-dimensional mode, two-dimensional, pulsed Doppler, continuous and colorful. Standard echocardiographic cuts were obtained. With the pulsed Doppler it was possible to measure the velocities of peak venous blood flow in the right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV), called S-wave, D and A. The S wave indicated the systolic antegrade flow, the D wave, the diastolic antegrade flow, and wave A, retrograde flow during the atrial contraction. In the other three PVs, the measures were not carried out by technical difficulties inherent in the method. Also, with the Doppler's help, the systolic pressure RV (RVSP) was calculated by the physiological tricuspid regurgitation and the average pressure in the pulmonary artery (PMAP). In both RSPV, as in the other PV and around the AE, it was repeatedly searched with the Doppler's aid, the presence of locations with the possible size reduction, this being considered when the flow rate was greater than 2.0 m/s with the pulsed Doppler and/or with the colored Doppler when existing turbulence [4,5,11,12]. Chest MDCT was performed in a brand GE®'s device (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI), lighspeed model Multicut (multislice) of 16 channels, with images obtained at intervals between 0.625 mm cuts. With the child fasting, the peripheral vein was punctured with a Jelco 22 or 24 in upper member and the midazolam dose of 0.1 mg /kg propofol and 0.5% of 2 to 4 mg /kg. The non-invasive mean blood pressure and the pulse oximetry were constantly monitored and the child was kept under spontaneous ventilation with a 100% oxygen mask with 2 and 4 1/ min The standardization of tests was possible once all were performed by a single radiologist and a single technician in radiology, accompanied by an anesthesiologist, pediatric, cardiovascular surgeon and nurses. The contrast used was Optiray® 350 (injectable loversol 74%), containing 350 mg /ml of organically bound iodine, or a non-ionic contrast agent of low toxicity and osmolarity (Mallinickrodt Inc. - Raleigh, NC - USA). The dose was based on the weight of the child, according to manufacturer's instructions and administered in the least amount possible to properly obtain the images. Images of axial slices in helical mode were obtained, which allowed large volumes of data to be reformatted images in the sagittal, coronal and oblique planes. With this volume of images acquired by the axial, it was possible to perform three-dimensional reformations and reconstructions (3D) volumetric called MIP (maximum intensity projection) reconstructions and colorful 3D called Rendering volume. The diameter of the mouth of each pulmonary vein was measured essentially based on axial, sagittal, coronal and oblique cuts, in the short and long axes, in order to obtain the area and check possible size reductions compared to a qualitative description. With the diameter of each pulmonary vein, the area was calculated and indexed by their patient's body surface, in order to standardize the measurements and to be able to compare them. The possibility of size reduction was considered, when the value was at least one average standard deviation of the studied areas of pulmonary vein. The measures were reconfirmed in three-dimensional reconstructions and associated with descriptive findings, but with illustrative and non-scientific purposes. AE was measured in length (craniocaudal), width (lateral-lateral) and depth (anteroposterior), being possible to calculate the volume by multiplying the measurements and in the same way as for VVPP, it was indexed to body surface of the patient. The possibility that the AE is underdeveloped was considered, when the obtained value was at least one standard deviation lower than the average volumes. These data were compared with the descriptive findings. The lungs were analyzed as for the presence of parenchymal injuries, vascular signs and signals that could indicate abnormalities. With the images obtained and measurements of the PV and AE, a single observer, radiologist, experienced in congenital heart disease, analyzed the morphological patterns descriptively (qualitatively) and all data were correlated with the clinical history findings, physical examination, chest radiography, ECG and echocardiography. In the statistical analysis, the continuous quantitative variables with Gaussian distribution were represented and analyzed as ± mean standard deviation. Continuous quantitative variables without Gaussian distribution were represented as median (25-75 percentile). All qualitative variables were represented as absolute number (percentage of the total). The survival was expressed by Kaplan-Meier curve and its significance with the log rank test with the program Prism 4.0 for Windows. The alpha error admitted for statistical significance was of 5%. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and the accuracy of the MDCT were calculated, in relation to the clinical evaluation and tests ordered routinely in the late follow-up. A gold standard was considered when at least one of these presented itself altered.   RESULTS The sample of 12 the patients is presented in a descriptive manner, in order to allow a better analysis of the found data. The MHDF, EEM, GVR and LLF patients were carriers of CATVP of supra-cardiac type; LJD, MICP and EBA, of heart type; JDSA, HVDS, KCRM and JRM, of infracardiac type; and VSF, of mixed type. All patients were in functional class I (NYHA) except one (LJD) with CATVP heart type, which presented gauge reduction of PV was reoperation and is acetylsalicylic acid. Another patient (JDSA) with CATVP infracardiac had seizures in the postoperative period and, although no more symptoms after discharge, still uses carbamazepine. Cardiac auscultation was within normal limits, except in three patients who had nonspecific murmurs (MICP, HVDS and KCRM). Of the eight male patients, five (62.50%) were below the 50th percentile of body mass index (BMI), and three (37.50%) below the 15th percentile. All patients were female with a BMI above the 85th percentile. Many children presented pleuropulmonary fields with normal transparency, free diaphragmatic domes and cardiac area within normal limits, detected in the chest radiography. Two patients (GVR and HVDS) had a slight increase in heart size by visual impression, little discordant ICT, and in three children was noted prominence of the right cavities (GVR, HVDS and JRM). In one patient (EEM), it was observed subsegmentar opacity in the right lung base, adjacent to the diaphragm, which may represent sub segmental atelectasis. Another patient (LJD) presented hypertransparency of the left lung, by reduction of the vascular markings. Most EKGs showed up within the normal range, with discrete electrical conduction disorders, such as changing the anterior septal ventricular repolarization, conduction disturbance of the right branch and right ventricular overload, apparently without clinical significance. The echocardiography showed that the measure of the blood flow's velocity in the RSPV was less than 2 m/s in all patients, and the highest D waves found were 1 m/s and 1.3 m/s, and in patients LLF MICP. There was also no other size reduction in PV, as in anastomosis between the SVC and the AE. The RVSP was considered normal in all patients, being the highest found in the LJD patient (37 mmHg). The MPAP can not be measured in two patients, LJD and GVR. In all other patients, the MPAP was also normal. In one patient (LJD), there was narrowing of the VCS with AD's mouth, with venous flow velocity of 1.89 m/s, considered by echocardiography as discrete gauge reduction. It was also observed in this patient an important dilation of the azygos vein and blood flow in the opposite direction. The analysis of the MDCT in each patient provided descriptively many details of the anatomical changes on the PV, VPC, AE and lung parenchyma, among others. The table 3 provides an overview of the sites diagnosed as outside of the normal range. The mean measurements of PV indexed by body surface area and their respective standard deviations were: RUPV 113.36 ± 56.49 mm 2/m 2, VPID 98.72 ± 42.26 mm 2/m 2, LSPV 70.05 ± 30.94 mm2/m2, LIPV 59.58 ± 31.18 mm2/m2. When considering at least one standard deviation lower than the average, the values suggested reduction of significant size and therefore it could represent anatomical impairment of PV were respectively 56.87 mm2 /m2, 56.46 mm2/m2, 39.10 mm2/m2 and 28.40 mm 2/m 2, as shown in Table 4.     Thus, purely valuing measures, we should consider the significant size reduction the LLF patients in RUPV with 20.05 mm2/m2; LJD, the RIPV, and LIPV LSPV with 41.97 mm2/m2 26.32 mm2/m2, 15.50 mm2/m2; JDSA in RIPV with 41.04 mm2/m2; HVDS, in VPID and LIPV with 45.89 mm2/m2 and 21,60 mm2/m2; and KCRM in RUPV with 39.75 mm2/m2. The descriptive analysis of the findings by an experienced radiologist in congenital heart disease showed compression of some pulmonary vein or caliber reduction in patients LLF, LJD, HVDS, KCRM, JRM and VSF. So it was coincidental in four of six patients indicated by the measures. Also, with respect to the affected PV, there was a discrepancy in the LJD, JDSA, HVDS and KCRM patients, suggesting that the measures do not help in the correct diagnosis of the presence or absence of injury on the PV. The LA volume average indexed by body surface area and its standard deviation was 6.02 ± 1.70 cm3/m2. Considering at least one average standard deviation it was considered LA to be undeveloped when the value was less than 4.33 cm3/m2, a fact that occurred in two patients, GVR and LLF (Table 5). The descriptive analysis of the EA by the radiologist with the aid of MDCT, suggested appropriate development in all patients, indicating that these measures were not helpful.     Four patients had abnormalities suggestive of parenchymal lesions, all with impairment of the left lung: GVR with hypo attenuation of the posterior and superior basal segments of the lower lobe and the entire upper lobe, secondary to atelectasis; LJD with reduction of the vascular markings; HVDS with opacity in range in the posterior basal segment of lower lobe and middle lobe, suggesting sub segmental atelectasis; and JRM with band opacity in the lower lobe, also suggesting sub segmental atelectasis (Table 6). Some examples of these findings are presented below to illustrate the capacity of a morphological definition of the MDCT. On the MHDF patient, a large stump was found next to the innominate vein (IV), remnant of the vertical vein (VV). The four PV presented a good development, without caliber reduction. There were no signs of TP increase or lesions in the lung parenchyma. These findings were in accordance with the clinical evaluation and other examinations. In EEM patients, the MDCT showed no changes, being concordant with the clinical and laboratory tests, except for chest X-ray, which revealed an image suggesting atelectasis, but the CT rejected that possibility. Therefore, for this patient, the MDCT was superior and more enlightening. In the GVR's patient, it was noted that the descending aorta appeared to compress the SVC along the mouth of the PVs to the left (Figures 1A-1C). The left lung had elongated opacities in the lower and upper lobe, and hypo attenuation in other segments, suggesting increased secondary airspace to atelectasis. The right lung was normal. In the clinical evaluation, the patient presented weight development below the 15th percentile, the chest X-ray suggested cardiac area at the upper limit of normality and did not show pulmonary injuries. The other tests were normal, suggesting that TCMD for this patient was also higher. In the LLF patient, the VPC on the right was presented with a long intramediastinal haul, elongated. There size reduction of the distal of the VPSD, which was small and with size reduction (Figure 2). The lung parenchyma was normal. In clinical evaluation, the patient was below the percentile 15 of BMI for his age. Chest X-ray and ECG did not indicate changes, however, the echocardiogram, the D wave measured at RUPV was one of the largest found in all patients (1 m/s), and therefore there is agreement between the clinical, echocardiographic and MDCT, even by setting the echocardiographic size reduction was considered when the venous flow velocity was greater than 2 m/s.     On the LJD patient, who required re-operation for caliber reduction of the PV, it was noted an important reduction in the diameter of the VPC to the left and of the LSPV and the LIPV. The PV to the right, which were expanded with right atrial tissue, were normal. The VCS also had an important gauge reduction with its mouth in AD, with azygos vein opacification by a contrast mean. There was a significant reduction in the vascular markings of the left lung, despite the tracheobronchial tree having normal appearance. This patient was the only functional class II (NYHA), with weight-to-height development below the 15th percentile, using acetylsalicylic acid due to the size reduction at the junction of VCS with AD. The radiography was changed to the left and the ECG had right ventricular overload, consistent with the highest RVSP found on echocardiography, with a D wave of 0.95 m/s. All these findings were consistent with those found on the MDCT. In MICP patient, we noticed that the PV, on the right, drained directly from the left atrium and the left PV converged on a path of VPC, which had no gauge reduction. There was an increase of the TP gauge, which correlated with clinically systolic murmur left sternal border smooth, without irradiation, but changes in chest X-ray and on the ECG weren't noticed, nor the RVSP or PMAP increased. The D wave was the largest found in all patients, measured at 1.3 m/s and that didn't correlate with images of TCMD, which clearly demonstrate excellent lade of VPSD in AE. The EBA patient was an example of anatomy with normal development of VVPP. The clinical evaluation, as well as all complementary tests indicated no changes and the MDCT was concordant in all findings (Figure 3).     In the JDSA patient, the right PVs had long a haul, but were symmetrical and without size reductions. The TP and the pulmonary arteries had normal development and there were no signals of pulmonary parenchymal lesions. These data were consistent with the clinical cardiologic evaluation, chest X-ray and ECG, which were normal. On the echocardiogram, it was found an RVSP of 36 mmHg, but with low PMAP of 7 mmHg. The HVDS patient had elongated lower PV, the LIPV being notably smaller caliber than VPID. Apparently, the descending aorta determined compression in the LIPV. The upper PV had normal caliber. The TP and pulmonary arteries were enlarged gauge in relation to the aorta and there was opacity in range in the lower left basal segment and the middle lobe, suggesting atelectasis subsegmentar (Figures 4A-4F). Thus, the MDCT findings reflected the clinical evaluation with systolic murmur at the left sternal border and chest X-ray with increased cardiac area. However, the ECG and echocardiogram showed up unchanged and were not consistent with all other findings. The MDCT also showed lung injuries that were absent on the simple thorax X-ray. In the KCRM patient, the LIPV presented itself elongated, with gauge reduction compared to the contralateral vein, apparently suffering compression by the descending aorta. There was no gauge reduction in the superior PVs. This visual interpretation was different from the measurements of PV. In the clinical evaluation, had vibratory systolic murmur at the left sternal border, the chest X-ray was normal, ECG drew attention by junctional rhythm, echocardiogram RVSP 32 mmHg and wave D of 0.96 m/s showed no change. In the JRM's patient, TCMD found caliber reduction of VPIE, as well as opacity in the lower left lobe, with subsegmentar atelectasis. In this patient, the clinical evaluation was normal, the chest X-ray showed only mild prominence of the right cavities. The ECG and the echocardiography did not show changes. Thus, the reduction in the LIPV´s caliber may have some association with these findings. On the VSF patient, the LSPV was short and with small caliber, the LIPV was elongated and with reduction on the size compared to the other PV. The lung parenchyma was normal. Clinical evaluation and all other examinations were also normal, indicating that the MDCT findings should not be interpreted in isolation. Based on the findings above, the MDCT showed changes in eight patients, being that in seven of these there were also changes in at least one of the other variables evaluated, in other words, in the clinical assessment or additional tests routinely used, and in one of these patients, the other counts were normal. In the other four patients, the MDCT showed no change, and in three, it was consistent with the other data analyzed, and in one patient, there was a change of the other examinations. Thus, we found that the TCMD with respect to the clinical evaluation and other analyzed additional tests showed a sensitivity of 87.5% (95% CI 64.6% to 100.0%), specificity of 75.0% (95% 32.6% to 100.0%), positive predictive value 87.5% (95% CI 64.6% to 100.0%), negative predictive value of 75.0% (95% CI 32, 6% to 100.0%) and accuracy of 83.3% (95% CI 62.2% to 100.0%), as briefly shown in Table 6.   DISCUSSION CATVP is a rare disease and case series of 16 patients operated between 1492 (1.07%) with congenital heart disease in six years, although small, it was expected, in line with other large studies, as Bohemia Survival Study, which identified 40 children with CATVP among 815,569 born between 1980 and 1990, and the Baltimore-Washington Infant Study, which found a prevalence of 0.087 per 1000 births invasive [11,12]. The reduction in caliber of the VVPP, that we commonly call stenosis, it is surely the worst late complication that can occur in a patient operated by CATVP. Usually it manifests itself quickly, leading the patient to a resurgery during the first six months after the repair. [13] This need for early approach still remains because of high mortality in centers of excellence around the world [4,5,13-15]. There are several mechanisms that can lead to the size reduction of one or more of PV, although it is still incompletely understood [13]. Among these mechanisms there are inadequate alignment of the incisions between VPC and AE, causing shrinkage in the anastomosis, which leads to PV distortion [16]. Also, some authors attribute the stenosis and the need for a resurgery to intimal hyperplasia with thickened proliferation of the inflammatory tissue [17]. In our study, we observed that in some patients, there were PVs that had a caliber reduction, the LIPV being clearly the most affected. Sometimes the PVs were only compressed by the descending aorta, perhaps by its anatomical position during the formation posterior to the pericardial sac. Incisions very close to the PV can also lead to a post surgery stenosis of these veins. To avoid this complication, a good technical option is opening the VPC towards the VV in T or Y, expanding the anastomotic site. This attention should always be in the surgeon's mind and, in patients operated in series, such caution was observed, avoiding incisions in the PVs [17]. Some experts claim that it is suspected that many patients undergoing TAPVC live normally, however, present in a lesion of PV studying totally silent way [17]. This statement leads us to think that TCMD can be a test capable of detecting such changes as early as possible, since in our series we observed changes in completely asymptomatic patients. Important to stress that this was not the purpose of the study, but opens the way for further investigation. The operated CATVP patient progresses, most often clinically asymptomatic, similar to that found in our study, in which 11 (91.66%) had been completely asymptomatic. The heart murmur is generally absent or, if present, it is insignificant and non-specific, except in situations where there is still pulmonary hypertension or the presence of any significant residual defect. Heart murmurs observed in the patients in our study were considered not significant because all were +/6 + or ++/6+ at the left sternal border, smooth and radiations. So they would not be valued as an indicative of a change in the routine clinical examination, but we also noticed that the three patients with murmurs (MICP, HVDS and KCRM) presented abnormalities on MDCT. It is important to remember that if there is a problem in one or more PVs, the probability of the murmur being strong would be indeed minimal, because it is a low pressure site, plus the anatomical position is posterior and, therefore, barely audible in the normal auscultation. The BMI was much lower than the expected in three patients (GVR, LLF and LJD), who were in the functional class I, not on medication and with normal cardiac auscultation. These patients showed abnormalities on MDCT, whether lung or VPC's compression of the descending aorta or decrease in caliber of PV to the left, there is a strong association of height and weight development with the findings of MDCT. The chest X-ray in the late postoperative period should be normal when the patient has not evolved with stenosis of VVPP or stenosis of the anastomotic region and lung fields should not show changes since the patient did not need a long stay in ventilate assistance that had caused injuries such as atelectasis or fibrosis. In our study, all patients showing abnormal chest radiograph were confirmed by MDCT, but one of the patients who had an image suggestive of atelectasis (EEM) had a normal CT scan. Then, there was a strong association between radiographic images and MDCT. The ECG should show sinusal rhythm in most of the patients. Significant arrhythmias may exist on asymptomatic patients who had belatedly been submitted to the correction of CATVP, as occurred with the KCRM patient, whose ECG showed a junctional rhythm. Many patients showed no significant changes in the conduction system, for example, anterolateral ventricular repolarization, conduction disturbance or right bundle branch block. These findings are consistent with the literature, which show a high incidence of sinus node dysfunction and low total atrioventricular block, as well as the atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are uncommon significant [18]. In all children assessed by echocardiogram, the RVSP was within normal limits, and the patient LJD the highest value since the known patient had lesions on the left PVs. The PMAP was also within normal limits and did not indicate pulmonary hypertension in any child. The venous flow velocity was measured during the RSPV and although not greater than 1.5 m/s or 2.0 m/s, as suggested by some authors consider that above these values as the presence of PV stenosis in patients LLF and MICP, the speeds were: 1.0 m/s 1.3 m/s, compatible with changes found in RUPV in MDCT [4,5]. The correlation of the previously discussed findings were correlated with the findings of TCMD. Chowdhury et al. [19] in 2008, extensive work on CATVP of mixed type showed image of TCMD on patient late evaluation operated five years ago, to exemplify the anastomosis between the left atrial appendage and the VV was still patent. This is the first publication we know of using MDCT in late evaluation of a patient with CATVP. MDCT has been considered as a complementary alternative to echocardiography in the pre surgery TACPV's diagnosis, since these patients are often in unfavorable hemodynamic conditions and the hemodynamic study to clarify the anatomy can worsen the clinical picture and provide more risk to life of the child. TCMD has the great advantage of being non-invasive and therefore offer practically negligible risk of life, except for a possible anaphylactic shock to the contrast [10]. Kim et al. [9] having studied 14 patients with CATVP, demonstrated that the combination of MDCT with three-dimensional reconstruction helped in the CATVP's diagnosis, being a good tool in the preoperative evaluation of neonates and infants [9]. However, it is not enough for adequate visualization of intracardiac structures due to heart rate and generally high respiratory movements. Indeed, it is virtually impossible to suspend breathing in children less than eight months when they are not intubated, being this important problem and obstacle to the MDCT's performance in neonates. All children in the study were sedated with midazolam and propofol as needed, beyond the fact that they are older, with an average age of 3.95 ± 1.32 years. In the presented case, the diameters of VVPP were measured and the LA volume's calculated. This had no association with the descriptive findings and, therefore, we believe that it should not be employed. The measures of the PVs already had some degree of association with the descriptive findings, but it was clear that the interpretation by an experienced doctor is more important and can complement the other findings of the complementary exams. The fact that MDCT needs to be in line with other findings in 10 of 12 patients, eg, the eight modified MDCT seven also with abnormal tests and four with normal MDCT, three with others also normal subjects, makes us believe that the MDCT can be used quite safely in the late follow-up of the CARVP's operated children. Discrete and significant morphological changes were observed, being superior for the detection of subtle changes, such as simple compression of VVPP or the increase of TP with relation to the aorta and presenting association with the significant findings for the tests used in daily clinic. Notably, the VPID was the most affected by compression or by the presence of gauge reduction. Thus, this analysis suggests that it can be used for monitoring of late patients undergoing total anomalous pulmonary venous connection, in order to anticipate the clinical worsening, allowing for a proper and early assessment, and to anticipate interventions, when needed. The limitations of the study were the small number of patients, which does not allow statistical comparisons. During the study period, there was an increase in the technical details for gain experience of the surgeon and staff. Patients were analyzed only with ECG and not with Holter, because most live in other states and could not be in the city for much time. The findings of TCMD were not compared to the hemodynamic study because ethically it would not be right to conduct an invasive test that theoretically presents some risk to the patient. There is also a lack of other works with MDCT or MRI that have belatedly evaluated a series of patients undergoing the surgical correction of the CATVP.   CONCLUSION In the late follow-up of patients undergoing to a surgical correction of TACPV, MDCT can provide valuable benefits and complement the diagnosis of possible anatomical and functional alterations, with a sensitivity of 87.5%, specificity of 75% and accuracy of 83.3%.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS to all the families who agreed to submit their children to the examination and all members of the Cardiology Department and Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery de São José do Rio Preto, who collaborated directly and indirectly to the completion this work.   