 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to determine if the findings of multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) are associated with the clinical parameters and laboratory tests routinely used in the late assessment of children undergoing surgical treatment of total anomalous connection of pulmonary veins (TAPV). METHODS: In the period from January 2002 to December 2007, 12 patients operated for TAPVC were assessed and later with the anamnesis, physical examination, chest radiography, electrocardiography, echocardiography and MDCT. Specific changes of each of these tests were identified and compared with the findings of the qualitative MDCT. RESULTS: Eleven patients were in functional class I (NYHA), three had nonspecific murmurs, and three were below the 15th percentile for height and weight development. The x-ray of the chest, two patients had changes of the lung fields, and three, a slight increase of heart area. In the electrocardiogram, one patient had right ventricular overload and one had junctional rhythm. All echocardiograms were within normal limits except in one patient with stenosis between the vena cava and the right atrium. MDCT was completely normal in four patients, three had compression of the pulmonary veins and four, significant caliber reduction, which correlated with other findings. Thus, the MDCT to demonstrate anatomical changes, when compared to changes in the physical examination or other examinations tested, showed a sensitivity of 87.5%, specificity 75%, positive predictive value 87.5%, negative predictive value 75% and accuracy of 83.3%. CONCLUSION: In the late follow-up of patients undergoing surgical correction of TAPVC, the MDCT can provide valuable insights and complement the diagnosis of possible anatomical and functional changes. Descriptors: Tomography. Congenital heart defects/surgery. Treatment result. INTRODUCTION the connection of THE anomalous pulmonary venous return, commonly called total anomalous connection of pulmonary veins (TAPV) is a congenital heart disease rare that encompasses a group of changes in which the pulmonary veins (PV) connect directly to the systemic venous circulation and not the left atrium (LA) [1]. According to the anatomical characteristics, can be classified into supracardíaca, cardiac, infracardiac, or mixed, with the possible use of various surgical techniques for the correction of the defect [2,3]. Regardless of the technique used, it is known that the PV can be compromised and do not present the proper development, either by the constitution itself to the tissue of the common pulmonary vein (cpv) or for lines of sutures used during the procedure. This situation is a late complication of most concern because it has important clinical consequences and compromises the prognosis [4,5]. Usually, these patients are followed with clinical evaluation, chest radiography, electrocardiography (ECG) and Holter monitoring, and echocardiogram that demonstrates or suggests with color Doppler the presence or not of the reduction of the caliber of the PV [4-7]. The gold standard for definitive diagnosis of this complication is still the hemodynamic study. However, recently, magnetic resonance imaging and multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) have been employed with greater emphasis on congenital heart disease to replace the invasive procedure [8-10]. This fact attracted our attention to verify if the findings of MDCT are associated with clinical parameters and laboratory tests routinely used in the assessment of children submitted to the surgical treatment of TAPVC, because until we know how, this is a diagnostic tool that has not yet been applied to the late follow-up in this specific group of patients. METHODS Between January 2002 and December 2007, were operated 1492 patients with congenital heart defects, of which 16 (1,07%) carriers of TAPVC. Everyone at the Hospital de Base, São José do Rio Preto, Fundação Faculdade Regional de Medicina (FUNFARME) / Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto medical school (famerp). The design of the study was submitted to the Scientific and Ethics Committee for Analysis of Research Project of the Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto, and approved by opinion no. 013/2009. The Term of Free and Informed Consent was signed by all the managers who participated in the study. Of the 16 patients, 3 (18.75%) died during the same hospital stay of the operation, being considered a hospital death and could not attend for assessment due to geographical difficulties. The survival of the total group of 16 patients in 2000 days was 81%, with confidence interval (CI) of 95% of 61.2% to 100%. Thus, 12 (92.31%) patients were assessed and later formed the study group. The mean follow-up of these 12 patients was 3.73 ± 1.33 years, and the median of 3.96 (1.34 - 5.43) years. The average age at the time of MDCT was 3.95 ± 1.32 years. The information found in the medical records and the data intraoperatórios of the group are presented in Tables 1 and 2. The late evaluation was based on anamnesis, physical examination, chest radiography, ECG, echocardiography and MDCT. The interview consisted of information about the functional class according to New York Heart Association (NYHA) and the use of medicines. The physical examination was focused on cardiac auscultation and anthropometric measurements of weight and height. At chest radiography, assessed the transparency of the lung fields, diaphragmatic domes, the size of the area and other changes, when present. The ECG provided the rhythm and heart rate, the intervals PR, QT and QTc, the axes of the P wave and the QRS complex, in addition to other changes. Echocardiography was performed with apparatus of the Phillips brand, model HD11 (Bothell, WA, USA) with pediatric multifrequency electronic transducer of 3 to 8 mhz, so one-dimensional, two-dimensional, pulsed Doppler, continuous and color. Echocardiographic patterns were obtained. With the pulsed Doppler was possible to measure the velocities of peak venous blood flow in the right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV), called S-waves, D and A. The S-wave indicated the systolic forward flow, the D-wave, the diastolic antegrade flow, and a wave, retrograde flow during atrial contraction. In the other three VP, the measures were not performed due to technical difficulties inherent in the method. Also with the help of the Doppler, it was calculated the systolic pressure, VD (RVSP) by reflux tricuspid physiological and the average pressure in the pulmonary artery (MPAP). Both in the RSPV, as in other PV and around the la, was insistently sought with the aid of Doppler locations with the presence of possible reductions in size, this being considered when the flow velocity was greater than 2.0 m/s and pulsed Doppler or color Doppler when there was flow turbulence [4,5,11,12]. Chest MDCT was performed in a unit of GE® brand (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI), model lighspeed, multi-edge (multislice) of 16 channels, being images are obtained with intervals between the cuts of 0,625 mm. With the child in fasting, peripheral vein was punctured with a jelco 22 or 24 in the top member, and midazolam administered at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg propofol and 0.5% of 2 to 4 mg/kg. The mean arterial pressure non-invasive pulse oximetry were constantly monitored and the child kept under spontaneous ventilation with oxygen mask at 100% with 2 to 4 l/min. The standardization of the examination was possible because they are all performed by a single radiologist and a single radiology technician, accompanied by an anesthesiologist, pediatrician, cardiovascular surgeons and nurses. The contrast used was 350 Optiray® (loversol injection 74%), containing 350 mg/ml organically bound iodine, that is, a non-ionic contrast low toxicity and osmolality (Mallinickrodt Inc. - Raleigh, NC, USA). The dose was based on weight of the child, according to the manufacturer's instructions and administered in the smallest amount possible to obtain adequate images. Images were obtained from axial cuts in the helical mode, which allowed large amounts of data to be reformatted images in the plans sagittal, coronal and oblique. With this volume of images acquired by the axial cuts, it was possible to perform reformatações and three-dimensional reconstructions (3D) volumetric called MIP (maximum intensity projection) and 3D reconstructions colored called volume Rendering. The diameter of the mouth of each pulmonary vein was measured essentially based on cuts in axial, sagittal, coronal and oblique, in the short and long axes, in order to obtain the area and check for possible reductions in size when compared to qualitative description. With the diameter of each pulmonary vein, the area was calculated and indexed by the respective body surface of the patient, in order to standardize the measurements and can compare them. It was considered the possibility of size reduction when the value was at least one standard deviation from the average of the areas of the pulmonary vein studied. The measures were reconfirmed in the three-dimensional reconstructions and associated with the descriptive findings, but with illustrative purpose and not scientific. The AE was measured in length (craniocaudal), width (lateral-lateral) and depth (anterior-posterior), being possible to calculate the volume by multiplying the measurements and, in the same way as for PV, it was indexed to the body surface of each patient. It was considered the possibility of the AE be less developed when the value was at least one standard deviation lower than the average volumes. These data were compared with the descriptive findings. The lungs were analyzed for the presence of parenchymal lesions, vascular markings and signs that indicate abnormalities. With the images obtained and measurements of PV and la, a single observer, radiologist, experienced in congenital heart disease, analyzed the morphological patterns descriptively (qualitatively) and all data were correlated with the findings of the anamnesis, physical examination, chest radiography, ECG, and echocardiogram. In the statistical analysis, the continuous quantitative variables with Gaussian distribution were analyzed and represented as mean ± standard deviation. The continuous quantitative variables without Gaussian distribution were represented as median (25-75 percentile). All the qualitative variables were represented as absolute number (percentage of total). The survival was expressed by kaplan-Kaplan-Meyer and its significance with the log rank test with Prism 4.0 for Windows®. The alpha error allowed for statistical significance was 5%. We calculated sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and accuracy of MDCT in relation to the clinical assessment and tests ordered routinely in the late follow-up. Was considered the gold standard when at least one of these had been changed. RESULTS THE case series of 12 patients are presented descriptively, with the aim of allowing better analysis of the data found. Patients MHDF, EEM, GVR and LLF were suffering from TAPVC type supracardíaca; LJD, MICP and EBA, kind heart; JDSA, HVDS, KCRM and JRM, type infracardiac; and VSF, mixed type. All patients were in functional class I (NYHA), except one (LJD) with cardiac type MDCT, which showed a reduction of caliber of PV, was reoperated and is in the use of aspirin. Another patient (JDSA) with TAPVC of infracardiac presented convulsive crisis in the post-operative period and, although no more symptoms after discharge from the hospital, still makes use of carbamazepine. The cardiac auscultation was within normal limits, except in three patients who had nonspecific murmurs (MICP, HVDS and KCRM). Of the eight male patients, five (62,50%) were below the 50th percentile of body mass index (BMI), and three (37,50%) below the 15th percentile. All patients were female with a BMI above the 85th percentile. At chest radiography, the majority of children had fields pleuropulmonares with transparency, normal, free diaphragmatic domes and the cardiac area within normal limits. Two patients (GVR and HVDS) had a mild increase in heart size by visual impression, little discordant of the ICT, and in three children it was noted prominence of the right cavities (GVR, HVDS and JRM). In one patient (EEM) was observed subsegmental opacity in the right lung base adjacent to the diaphragm, which may represent subsegmental atelectasis. Another patient (LJD) presented hipertransparência of the left lung, by reduction of the vascular markings. The majority of electrocardiograms performed within normal ranges, with discrete disturbances of electrical conduction, such as altered repolarisation ventricular, anterior-septal, conduction disorders right bundle branch and right ventricular overload, apparently without meanings clinical. The echocardiogram showed that the measure of blood flow velocity in the RSPV was less than 2 m/s in all patients, with the biggest waves D were found 1 m/s and 1.3 m/s, in patients LLF and MICP. It was also not found size reduction of the other PV, as well as in the anastomosis between the SVC and the AE. The RVSP was considered normal in all patients, being the highest found in the patient LJD (37 mmHg). The PMAP can not be measured in two patients, LJD, and GVR. In all other patients, the MPAP was also normal. In one patient (LJD), it was observed narrowing at the mouth of the VCS with AD, with venous flow velocity of 1.89 m/s, considered by echocardiography as mild reduction in caliber. Were also observed in this patient significant dilation of the vein ázigo and blood flow in the opposite direction to the usual. The analysis of the MDCT of each patient provided so many descriptive details of the anatomical changes in PV, SVC, atrium and the pulmonary parenchyma, among others. Table 3 provides an overview of the sites diagnosed as out of normal standards. The averages of the measures of the PV indexed by body surface area and their respective standard deviations were: RSPV 113,36 ± 56,49 mm2/m2, RIPV 98,72 ± 42,26 mm2/m2, LSPV 70,05 ± 30.94 mm2/m2, LIPV 59,58 ± 31.18 mm2/m2. When we considered at least one standard deviation below the mean, the values that suggested a significant decrease in size and, therefore, could represent the anatomical impairment of the VP were, respectively, 56,87 mm2/m2, 56,46 mm2/m2, 39,10 mm2/m2 and 28,40 mm2/m2, as shown in Table 4. Thus, valuing purely the measures, we should consider the significant reduction of caliber patients LLF, in the RSPV, with 20,05 mm2/m2; LJD, in the RIPV, LSPV and LIPV, with 41,97 mm2/m2, 26,32 mm2/m2, 15.50 mm2/m2; JDSA, in the RIPV, with 41,04 mm2/m2; HVDS, in the RIPV, and LIPV, with 45,89 mm2/m2 and 21.60 mm2/m2; and HVDS, in the RSPV, with 39.75 mm2/m2. The descriptive analysis of the findings by a radiologist experienced in congenital heart disease showed a pulmonary vein compression or size reduction in patients LLF, LLF, HVDS, KCRM, JRM and VSF. Therefore, it was the same in four of the six patients indicated by the measures. Also, with respect to the affected PV, there was a discrepancy in the patient LJD, JDSA, HVDS and KCRM, suggesting that the measures do not help in correct diagnosis of the presence or not of lesion in PV. The mean la volume indexed by body surface area and its standard deviation was 6,02 ± 1,70 cm3/m2. Considering at least one standard deviation from the mean, was considered an AE bit is developed when the value obtained was less than 4,33 cm3/m2, which occurred in two patients, GVR and LLF (Table 5). The descriptive analysis of the AE by the radiologist, with the help of MDCT, suggested appropriate development in all patients, indicating that these measures were not useful. Four patients had changes suggestive of lesions in the lung parenchyma, all with involvement of the left lung: GVR with hypoattenuation in the posterior basal segments of the upper and lower lobe and the entire upper lobe, secondary to atelectasis; LJD with reduced vascular markings; HVDS with opacity in band in the posterior basal segment of lower lobe and middle lobe, suggesting subsegmental atelectasis; and JRM with opacity in band in the lower lobe, also suggesting subsegmental atelectasis (Table 6). Some examples of these findings are presented below to illustrate the ability of MDCT morphological definition. In the patient MHDF, was found a large stump next to the vein inominada (VI), remnant of the vein vertical (VV). The four PV were well developed and no reduction in caliber. There were no signs of increased pt or lesions in the lung parenchyma. These findings were in agreement with the clinical evaluation and other laboratory tests. In the patient EEM, the MDCT showed no changes, in agreement with the clinical evaluation and laboratory tests, except with the chest radiograph, which revealed an image suggestive of atelectasis, but the ct departed this possibility. Thus, for this patient, MDCT was superior and more enlightening. In the patient GVR, it was noted that the descending aorta seemed to compress the SVC, near the mouth of the left PVS (Figures 1A to 1C). The left lung opacities had elongated in the upper and lower lobe, and hypoattenuation in other segments, suggestive of increased air space secondary to atelectasis. The right lung was normal. On clinical evaluation, the patient had a height and weight development below the 15th percentile, the chest radiograph suggested cardiac area in the upper limit of normal and showed no lung lesions. The other tests were normal, suggesting that MDCT for this patient was also higher. In the patient LLF, the right SVC was presented with over the course intramediastinal, elongated. There was a reduction in caliber of the distal RSPV, which was small and reduced in size (Figure 2). The lung parenchyma was normal. On clinical evaluation, the patient was below the 15th percentile of BMI-for-age. The chest radiograph and the ECG changes did not indicate, however, in the echocardiogram, the D-wave measured at the RSPV was one of the largest found in all patients (1 m/s), therefore there is concordance between the clinical findings, echocardiographic and MDCT, although by definition echocardiographic the gauge reduction was seen when the velocity of venous flow was greater than 2 m/s. In the patient LJD, which was reoperated by reduction of the caliber of PV, we noticed a significant reduction of the caliber of the SVC to the left and LSPV and LIPV. The right PV, which have been expanded with a tissue right atrial were normal. The VCS also presented significant reduction in size near its mouth in the AD, with opacification of the portal vein ázigo by the contrast medium. There was significant reduction of vascular markings in the left lung, despite the tree tracheobronchial have a normal appearance. This was the only patient in functional class II (NYHA), with height and weight development below the 15th percentile in the use of acetylsalicylic acid due to the reduction of gauge at the junction of the GUYS with the AD. Radiography was changed to the left and on the ECG there was right ventricular overload, consistent with the highest RVSP found in the echocardiogram, with wave D of 0.95 m/s. All these findings were in agreement with those found in the MDCT. In the patient MICP, it was noted that the right PV drenavam directly in AE, and the left VP converged on a path of VPC, which showed no reduction in caliber. There was increase in the diameter of the pt, which correlated clinically with systolic murmur at the left sternal border, smooth, without irradiation, but no changes were noted on chest radiography, ECG or an increase in RVSP or PMAP. The D wave was the largest found in all patients, measured at 1.3 m/s and that is not correlated with the images of the MDCT, which clearly demonstrate the excellent the mouth of the RSPV in AE. The patient EBA was an example of the anatomy with the normal development of PV. The clinical evaluation, as well as all laboratory tests, indicated no change and MDCT was consistent in all findings (Figure 3). In the patient JDSA, the right PV had a long course, but they were symmetrical and without reductions in size. The TP and pulmonary arteries had normal development and had no signs of parenchymal lesions of lung. These data were in agreement with clinical cardiology, chest radiography and EKG, which were normal. In the echocardiogram, it was found RVSP of 36 mmHg, but with lower MPAP of 7 mmHg. The patient HVDS showed the PV lower elongated, and the LIPV notably smaller caliber than the RIPV. Apparently, the descending aorta determined the compression of LIPV. The upper PV had normal caliber. The TP and the pulmonary arteries were increased in size in relation to the aorta and opacity in band in the basal segment left lower and middle lobe, suggesting subsegmental atelectasis (Figures 4A to 4F). Thus, the MDCT findings reflected the clinical assessment with a systolic murmur at the left sternal border, and chest radiography with increased heart size. However, ECG and echocardiogram showed no changes and were not in agreement with all other findings. MDCT also showed lung lesions that were absent in the plain chest radiograph. In KCRM patient, the LIPV was elongated, with reduced size in relation to the contralateral vein, apparently suffering from compression by the descending aorta. There was no reduction in upper PV caliber. This visual interpretation was different from the obtained measures of PV. The clinical evaluation, there was a systolic murmur vibrating in the left sternal border, and chest radiography was normal, the ECG drew attention by junctional rhythm, the echocardiogram, with RVSP of 32 mmHg, and D-wave of 0.96 m/s showed no change. In the patient JRM, MDCT found reduction in the diameter of the LIPV, and opacity in band in the left lower lobe, with the appearance of subsegmental atelectasis. In this patient, the clinical evaluation was normal, chest radiography showed only discrete prominence of the right cavities. The ECG and the echocardiogram indicated no change. Thus, reduction in the diameter of the LIPV may have some association with these findings. In the patient ESV, the LSPV was short and of small caliber, the LIPV was elongated and reduced in size compared to other PV. The lung parenchyma was normal. The clinical evaluation and any and all other examinations were also normal, indicating that the MDCT findings should not be interpreted in isolation. Based on the findings above, the MDCT showed changes in eight patients, seven of these also had alteration in at least one of the other variables evaluated, that is, clinical evaluation or laboratory tests routinely used, and in one of these patients, the other counts were normal. In the other four patients, the MDCT indicated changes, and in three, it was consistent with other data analyzed, and, in one patient, there was a change from other examinations. Thus, we find that the MDCT with respect to clinical evaluation and other laboratory tests analyzed showed a sensitivity of 87.5% (95% CI 64.6% to 100.0%), specificity of 75.0% (95% CI 32.6% to 100.0%), positive predictive value 87.5% (95% CI 64.6% to 100.0%), negative predictive value of 75.0% (95% CI 32.6% to 100.0%) and accuracy of 83.3% (CI 95% from 62.2% to 100.0%)as briefly shown in Table 6. DISCUSSION TAPVC is an uncommon disease, and case series of 16 patients operated on between 1492 (1.07%) with congenital heart disease in the period of six years, in spite of being small, as it was expected, in line with other large studies, such as the Bohemia Survival Study, which has identified 40 children with TAPVC among the 815.569 born between 1980 and 1990, and the Baltimore-Washington Infant Study, which found a prevalence of 0.087 per 1000 invasive births [11,12]. The reduction of the PV caliber, commonly called stenosis, it surely is the worst complication that can occur late in a patient operated for TAPVC. It usually manifests itself quickly, leading the patient to reoperation in the first six months after the repair [13]. This need for early approach still remains the cause of high mortality in centers of excellence around the world [4,5,13-15]. There are several mechanisms that can lead to a reduction in size of one or more PVS, although it is still incompletely understood [13]. Among these mechanisms are inadequate alignment of the incisions between the VPC and the AE, causing shrinkage in the anastomosis, which leads to distortion of the PV [16]. Also, some authors attribute the stenosis and need for reoperation intimal hyperplasia with proliferation of thickened inflammatory tissue [17]. In our study, we observed that, in some patients, there was a PV that showed a reduction of caliber, and the LIPV clearly the most affected. Sometimes, the only PV was compressed by the descending aorta, perhaps because of its anatomical position during the later training, the pericardial sac. Incisions very close to the PV can also lead to stenosis of these veins in the postoperative period. To avoid this complication, a good technical option is the opening of the VPC in the direction of VV in T or Y, extending the anastomotic site. This attention should always be on the mind of the surgeon and in surgical patients in the series, such caution was observed, avoiding incisions in PV [17]. Some experts say there is suspicion that many patients operated for TAPVC live normally, however, present a injury in a VP candidate, so totally silent [17]. This statement leads us to think that MDCT can be an examination with an ability to detect such changes as early as possible, since in our study changes were observed in patients totally asymptomatic. Important to emphasize that this was not the aim of the study, but opens the way for further investigation. The patients operated for TAPVC evolves, most often, clinically asymptomatic, similar to that found in our study, in which 11 (91.66%) had to be totally asymptomatic. The murmur is usually absent or, when present, is negligible and nonspecific, except in situations that also have pulmonary hypertension or presence of significant residual defects. The heart murmurs observed in patients in our study were considered non-significant, because all were +/6+, or ++/6+ in the left sternal border, smooth and without irradiation. Thus, it would not be valued as indicative of a change in routine clinical examination, but it was noted that the three patients with murmurs (MICP, HVDS and KCRM) showed abnormalities on MDCT. It is important to remember that if there is a problem in one or more PVS, the probability of the blow to be strong would really be minimal, because it is local low pressure, in addition to the anatomical position being posterior, and, therefore, hardly audible in the normal cardiac auscultation. The BMI was much lower than expected in three patients (GVR, LLF and LLF), which were in functional class I, are not making use of medications and with normal cardiac auscultation. These patients showed abnormalities on MDCT, whether pulmonary or SVC compression of the descending aorta or decrease in caliber of the left PV, there is a strong association of height and weight development with MDCT findings. The chest radiograph in the late postoperative period should be normal when the patient has not evolved with PV stenosis or stenosis of the region anastomotic, as well as the lung fields should not have changed since the patient has not required long-stay in ventilatory assistance, which has caused injuries such as atelectasis or fibrosis. In our study, all patients who had changes on chest radiography were confirmed by MDCT, except one patient who had an image suggestive of atelectasis (EEM), and your ct scan was normal. Soon, there was a strong association between radiographic images and MDCT. The ECG should show sinus rhythm in almost all patients. Significant arrhythmias may exist in asymptomatic patients submitted late to the correction of TAPVC, as occurred with the KCRM patient, whose ECG showed junctional rhythm. Many patients showed no significant changes in the driving system, such as, for example, repolarization, ventricular, anterior-septal, conduction disorders or bundle branch block right. These findings are consistent with the literature, which shows a high incidence of sinus node dysfunction and low total atrioventricular block, as well as the significant atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are uncommon [18]. In all children evaluated by echocardiography, RVSP was within normal limits, and the patient LJD the largest value found, because we knew the patient had lesions on the left PV. The MPAP was also within normal limits and did not indicate pulmonary hypertension in any child. The venous flow velocity was only measured in the RSPV, and although of not greater than 1.5 m/s or 2.0 m/s, as recommended by some authors who consider values above these such as the presence of PV stenosis, in patients LLF and MICP, the higher speeds found were: 1.0 m/s and 1.3 m/s, consistent with the changes found in the RSPV in the MDCT [4,5]. The correlation of the findings discussed above was correlated with the MDCT findings. Chowdhury et al. [19] in 2008, in an extensive study on TAPVC mixed type, presented MDCT image in late evaluation of patients operated for five years, to illustrate that the anastomosis between the left atrial appendage and VV remained patent. This is the first publication that we know of using MDCT in the late assessment of a patient with TAPVC. The MDCT has been considered as an alternative complementary to echocardiography in the preoperative diagnosis of TAPVC, since these patients often find themselves in unfavorable hemodynamic conditions and hemodynamic studies to clarify the anatomy can worsen the clinical picture and provide more risk to the life of the child. MDCT has the great advantage of being non-invasive and, therefore, pose a risk of life-almost negligible, except for a possible anaphylactic shock of the contrast [10]. Kim et al. [9], studying 14 patients with TAPVC, demonstrated that the combination of MDCT with three dimensional reconstruction helped in the diagnosis of TAPVC, being a good tool in the preoperative evaluation of neonates and infants [9]. However, it is not sufficiently adequate for visualization of intracardiac structures, due to heart rate and respiratory movements generally high. Indeed, it is virtually impossible to hold the breath in children less than eight months when they are intubated, with this important problem and impediment to implementation of MDCT in neonates. All the children in the study were sedated with midazolam and propofol when needed, in addition to the fact they are older, with an average age of 3.95 ±1.32 years. In the case series presented, we measured the diameters of the PV and calculated the volume of the AE. This has not had any association with the descriptive findings and, therefore, we understand that it should not be employed. Already, the measures of PV had some degree of association with the descriptive findings, but it was clear that the interpretation by an experienced physician is important and can complement the other findings of other examinations. The fact that MDCT is in agreement with other findings in 10 of 12 patients, ie, from the eight MDCT changed, seven also with abnormal tests and four with normal MDCT, with three other tests also normal, makes us believe that the MDCT can be used quite safely in the late follow-up of children operated for TAPVC. Were found to have discrete and important morphological changes, being higher for the detection of subtle changes, such as simple compression of PV or the increase in TP with respect to the aorta, and it was associated with the significant findings for the tests used in everyday practice. Notably, the RSPV was the most affected by compression or the presence of reduced caliber. Thus, this analysis suggests that it can be used for the late follow-up of patients operated for total anomalous connection of pulmonary veins in order to anticipate clinical deterioration, allowing evaluation more accurate and early, and can anticipate recurrences, when necessary. The study limitations were the small number of patients, which does not allow statistical comparisons. In the period studied, there has been an evolution in the technical details of experience gained by the surgeon and team. Patients were analyzed only with the ECG and not with a Holter, because most live in other States and could not be in town for a long time. The MDCT findings were compared to non-hemodynamic study because it would not be ethically correct to perform invasive procedure, which theoretically has some life-threatening to the patient. There is also lack of other studies with MDCT or MRI that have evaluated late a series of patients undergoing surgical correction of TAPVC. CONCLUSION In the late follow-up of patients undergoing surgical correction of TAPVC, the MDCT can provide valuable insights and complement the diagnosis of possible anatomical and functional changes, with a sensitivity of 87.5%, specificity 75% and accuracy of 83.3%. THANKS to all THE families who agreed to submit their children to the examinations and all members of the department of Cardiology and Pediatric Cardiovascular Surgery of São José do Rio Preto who collaborated directly and indirectly in the making of this work. 