SUMMARY Considering the unavailability of advanced equipment to acquire images in the surgical centers of most hospitals and fundamental importance to the surgeon an immediate visualization of cochlear implant immediately after insertion, a good option is the use of conventional radiography. To describe a quick practical radiographic method and cost, in order to assess not only the position but also the integrity of the electrodes, the installation of the cochlear implant. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Radiographs were analyzed in 262 patients undergoing cochlear implant surgery between March / 2005 and October / 2008 with intraoperative radiograph immediately after the insertion of electrodes. The radiographs were analyzed by the surgeon during surgery, and later by the radiologist. RESULTS: 524 radiographs were analyzed of which 95.61% had proper technique, patient positioning within the technique described in this study and good visualization of the electrodes and is considered satisfactory and 4.39% had inadequate technical and / or poor visualization of electrodes being considered unsatisfactory. CONCLUSION: Despite the portable X-ray devices have limitations, using appropriate techniques and accessories, it is possible to achieve satisfactory results with radiographs for visualization of cochlear implants. Keywords: diagnostic equipment, cochlear implant, radiography.     INTRODUCTION Taking into account the availability of a digital fluoroscopy equipment type surgical arc - which is an advanced acquisition offering images real-time imaging system from a variety of anatomical structures at any angle virtually conceivable anywhere or direction, widely used to guide various types of surgery - in most hospitals, mainly due to its high cost, a good option for viewing the cochlear implant after insertion is to use a device X-ray portable, since it is much more accessible and almost all hospitals have this feature. Although conventional radiography is often used for visualization of the cochlear implant, the execution of this technique on the surgical table with portable equipment offers a degree of complexity and requires special attention, especially in some details, such as adaptation of the position subject to the conditions and limitations the use of adequate doses compatible with the power equipment and the use of appropriate accessories that can ensure image quality. A general rule is that the x-ray any object whose thickness is greater than 10 cm, the use of antidifusora grid is essential, in this case, is adapted to the radiographic chassis and whose purpose is to filter the scattered radiation, optimizing image quality. However, the use of this accessory considerably limits the possibility of central ray slope, it is advisable that it be oriented perpendicular to the grid / film, and directed to the center of it. In this study, this deficiency was corrected by adapting the positioning of the head properly, in order to avoid overlapping of images between the structures of the inner ear and the denser structures of the temporal bone, keeping the central ray perpendicular to the film / grid.   MATERIALS AND METHODS We analyzed 524 radiographs of 262 patients undergoing cochlear implant surgery from March 2005 to October 2008. Both intraoperative radiographs were performed soon after the insertion of electrodes. This article was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Institution Human Beings where the study was conducted, Official Letter No. 181/2009-SVAPEPE-CEP. All analyzed radiological examinations were performed with apparatus X-ray portable UNIMAX model, SIEMENS, maximum power 90 kV and 30 mA. All radiographs were analyzed by the surgeon during surgery, and later by a radiologist, being classified as satisfactory and unsatisfactory according to the following criteria: density and contrast of the image density Radiographic is defined as the amount of blackening the image of a film radiographic processed. Radiographic contrast is defined as the density difference in adjacent areas of a radiographic image. Factors that directly influence the density and image contrast are the "kilovolt (kV), milliamperes (mA) and the exposure time", set in Rays gear control X. These factors should be adjusted ensuring that the images obtained are of the best quality possible and patients exposed to the lowest possible radiation dose. Resolution and Image resolution (sharpness) definition or resolution in a radiographic image is shown for clarity or sharpness of the most delicate structural lines and the edges of the fabric or image structures. The lack of visible resolution is called "blurring" or "lack of clarity". The main factors that influence the resolution / sharpness of the radiographic image are: The size of the focal area, the distance focus - image receptor (DFRI), the object distance - image receptor (DORI) and patient motion. The use of a small focal area, increased and decreased DFRI DORI result in an increased resolution; patient motion can be controlled requesting their cooperation and / or using shims radiolucent. Distortion image distortion is the deformation of the size or shape of the object projected on the means of radiographic recording. The primary factors that affect the distortion are: DFRI, the DORI, object alignment - image receptor and alignment / centering of the central ray. With the use of a correct DFRI, minimizing DORI, ensuring that the object and the image receiver are aligned by aligning and / properly centering the central ray of the structure to be imaged, can control the distortion in a radiographic image. Antidifusora grid was used in all radiographs, since the conventional radiography, a rule says that the x-ray any object whose thickness is greater than 10 cm is necessary to use antidifusora1-3 grid and thus on radiographs skull this accessory is necessary. Radiographic technique for visualization of cochlear implants at the time of installation are carried out two radiographic views: the 1st Antero-posterior - Skull AP (Transorbitária) and 2nd Oblique side 45, with central beam (RC) perpendicular to the film. Both techniques described here are adapted to perform the radiographs on the operating table with the patient supine. Tables 1 and 2 show the technical data related to the acquisition of radiographic images of this study.         AP Skull (Transorbitária) Patient position With the patient supine, the chassis is placed under the head, aligning the median sagittal plane at 90 ° to the horizontal plane, ensuring that there is no rotation and / or tilt of the head (Figure 1 ).     slightly flex the head, depressing the chin until the orbital-meatal line (LOM) is perpendicular to the film (Figure 2).     * If necessary, use radiolucent pads to ensure there is no movement during shooting. Central Ray Steer RC perpendicular to the film / grid parallel to LOM, directing it to the center of the orbit on the side of interest. Centralize the film to the Central Ray designed. Making the collimator skull outer edges or, if possible, using an extension cylinder. If the patient is under mechanical ventilation, do not handle it without the supervision of an anesthesiologist and / or responsible surgeon. Radiological results expected Proper positioning design the bony labyrinth in the center of the orbit. The absence of skull rotation is shown by the same distance between the edge of the orbit and the cranial side edge on both sides by the same distance and the median sagittal plane (identified by the crista galli) external to the orbital margin in both lados4,5 . Density and adequate contrast will allow the implant visualization throughout its length, and the structures within the bony labyrinth. sharp bone edges show the absence of movement (Figures 3 and 4).         Oblique side 45 Patient position With the patient supine, the chassis is placed under the head, turning his head sideways toward the side opposite to the interest until the mid-sagittal plane makes an angle of 45 degrees with the horizontal (Figure 5 ).     slightly flex the head, depressing the chin until the LOM is perpendicular to the film (Figure 6).     * If necessary, use radiolucent pads to ensure there is no movement during shooting. Central Ray Steer RC perpendicular to the film / grid, the entry point is 2 cm anterior to the external auditory meatus of the side that is high. Centralize the film to the Central Ray designed. Do collimation at the outer edge of the petrous pyramid on the high side or if possible use extension cylinder. NOTE: If the patient is on mechanical ventilation, do not handle it without the supervision of an anesthesiologist and / or responsible surgeon. Radiological results expected A properly positioned image will show the following: condyle mandible superimposed on the cervical spine. bony labyrinth below the petrous ridge. posterior margin of the mandibular branch superimposed on the posterior margin of the column cervical4,6. Density and adequate contrast will allow the implant visualization throughout its length, and the structures within the bony labyrinth. sharp bone edges show the absence of movement (Figures 7 and 8).         RESULTS The surgeon then the radiologist and reviewed a total of 524 rays, which are listed in Table 3.     Of the total assessed radiographs, 501 (95.61%) had adequate technical, with the correct patient positioning within the technique described in this study, density and adequate contrast, good sharpness, allowing good visualization of the cochlear implant electrodes and structures temporal bone and is considered satisfactory. Of the 524 evaluated radiographs, 23 (4.39%) had a failure in technique or positioning, density or inadequate contrast due to technical factors such as dose selection or failure in processing, or even unsatisfactory view of the electrodes (distortion or lack of clarity) and is considered unsatisfactory. During the study period, there were isolated cases (about 2%) when there was need for immediate intervention from the surgeon to reposition the electrodes due to factors such as false paths (eg introduction in the upper channel); electrodes compression; partial introduction with extracochlear electrodes. Factors which subsequently could lead to a stimulus of the facial nerve, as well as hinder and / or prevent the activation of the cochlear implant.   DISCUSSION X-raying the ear using the method of Stenvers (lateral oblique 45) a 12º slope in the central beam is required cranially, and the patient's head must be positioned so that the infrastructure orbito-meatal line (LIOM) is perpendicular to the film, with the patient in the prone position. You Arcelin or inverted Stenvers method, which is done with the patient supine, the central ray should be tilted 10º caudally and the patient's head well positioned with LIOM perpendicular to the film. This would optimize the visualization of bone structures temporal1,2,7. The technique described in this study was adapted for use in portable equipment which require some peculiar accessories such as chassis equipped with antidifusora grid, which limits the possibility of central beam tilt. To compensate for this deficiency and get a good result, it has changed the positioning of the patient's head, so that the orbito-meatal line (LOM) was perpendicular to the film / grid. This study has shown that even using portable equipment, it was possible to obtain satisfactory quality radiographs for visualization of cochlear implants throughout its length and its positioning and integrity of the electrodes, serving as an extremely important tool for the surgeon (since electrode impedance telemetry tests alone, do not rule out the possibility of false path of the implant), permiting immediate action to minimize costs and risks of surgery / post anesthesia, as can be seen in some cases isolates (about 2%), where such intervention was needed by poor positioning or compression of the electrodes of the cochlear implant. Alternatives An efficient alternative would be to use a digital system Fluoroscopic Mobile Boom C (surgical arc), which is an apparatus with emission of ionizing radiation of the type X-rays, capable of radiography and fluoroscopy, comprising arc is mounted on casters, generator X-ray, X-ray tube, control unit and image intensifier TV system with mobile support, digital subtraction images. The images are displayed on a monitor in real time, so it is a very versatile device and widely used in orthopedic surgery, vascular, neurological, gastrointestinal, urological interventions, among others, especially to guide the installation of prostheses, catheters and implants generally. The main advantage over the use of a portable X-ray machine is precisely the possibility of immediate image viewing, there is no need to wait for processing. The main disadvantages are: its high cost; its relatively large size that makes occupy considerable space in the operating room, sometimes even requiring adjustments in the rooms and operating tables to achieve the necessary implications; and also the use of higher doses of radiation, depending on the exposure time used.   CONCLUSION intraoperative radiograph cochlear implant is a fundamental tool because it allows the surgeon to assess not only the position but also the integrity of the electrodes, enabling, including, if necessary, immediate intervention. The use of handheld devices proved to be a fast, practical and inexpensive, affordable to the vast majority of hospitals.   