 SUMMARY Considering the unavailability of advanced equipments for acquisition of images in the surgical centers of the majority of the hospital centers and the critical importance they have to the surgeon an immediate visualization of the cochlear implants soon after their insertion, a good option is the use of conventional radiography. OBJECTIVE: to Describe a radiographic method fast, handy and low cost, allowing to assess not only the position but also the integrity of the electrodes, in the installation of the cochlear implant. MATERIAL AND methods: we analyzed radiographs of 262 patients who underwent cochlear implant surgery between March/2005 and October/2008, with x-ray transoperatória, shortly after the insertion of the electrodes. The radiographs were analyzed by the surgeon during surgery and, later, by the radiologist. RESULTS: we analyzed 524 x-rays of which, 95,61% had proper technique, with placement of the patient within the technique described in this study and good visualization of the electrodes, it being considered satisfactory and arachidic 4.39% had technical inadequate and/or display unsatisfactory of the electrodes, being considered unsatisfactory. CONCLUSION: in Spite of the X-Ray apparatus portable, they have limitations, using techniques and appropriate accessories, it is possible to obtain radiographs with satisfactory results for visualization of cochlear implants. Keywords: diagnostic equipment, cochlear implant, x-ray. INTRODUCTION Taking into consideration the unavailability of an equipment fluoroscopy digital arc type surgical - that is an advanced system of image acquisition, providing real-time images of a variety of anatomical structures at any angle in virtually conceivable, in any side or direction, widely used to guide various types of surgery in most hospitals, primarily due to its high cost, a good option for the visualization of the cochlear implants soon after their insertion is the use of an X-Ray machine portable, since it is much more accessible and almost all hospitals have this feature. Although conventional radiography be widely used for visualization of the cochlear implant, the implementation of this technique on the surgical table with portable equipment offers the right degree of complexity and requires special attention, especially in some details, such as: the adaptation of the positioning in accordance with the conditions and limitations, the employment of appropriate doses, compatible with the power equipment and the use of suitable fittings which can ensure the quality of the image. A general rule says that the x-ray any object whose thickness is larger than 10 cm, it is indispensable the use of grid antidifusora, which in this case, it is adapted to the chassis radiographic and whose purpose is to filter the radiation scattered by optimizing the quality of the image. However, the use of this accessory limits considerably the possibility of tilting the Beam center, it is advisable that the same be oriented perpendicularly to the grid/film, and directed to the center of the same. In this study, this deficiency was corrected by adapting the positioning of the head in the proper way, with the aim of avoiding the overlapping of images between the structures of the inner ear and the structures of the densest in the temporal bone, while the Radius and central perpendicular to the film/grid. Materials AND methods Were analyzed 524 radiographs of 262 patients submitted to cochlear implant surgery in the period from march 2005 to October 2008. The two x-rays transoperatórias were carried out immediately after the insertion of the electrodes. This article was approved by the Ethics Committee in Research in Humans of the Institution where the study was conducted, office no. 181/2009-SVAPEPE-ZIP. All x-ray examinations reviewed were performed with X-Ray machine portable model jreviews forums, mark SIEMENS, max output 90 kV and 30 mA. All radiographs were analyzed by the surgeon during surgery and, later, by a radiologist, and are classified into satisfactory and unsatisfactory according to the following criteria: Density and Contrast of the image Radiographic Density is defined as the amount of blackening on the image of a radiographic film processed. Radiographic contrast is defined as the difference in density on adjacent areas of a radiographic image. The factors that directly influence the density and contrast of the image are the "Quilovoltagem (kV), the Miliamperagem (mA) and exposure Time", adjusted on the command of the X-Ray appliance. These factors should be adjusted, ensuring that the images obtained are of the best quality possible, and the patients exposed to the lowest dose of radiation possible. Resolution or image Definition (sharpness) of The definition or resolution in a radiographic image is demonstrated by the clarity or sharpness of the lines in the structural the most delicate and the edges of the tissues or structures of the image. The lack of resolution of visible light is called "blurring" or "lack of sharpness". The main factors that influence in the resolution/sharpness of the radiographic image are: The size of the focal area, the distance focus - image receptor (DFRI), the distance object - image receptor (DORI) and the movement of the patient. The use of a small focal area, the increase of DFRI and the decrease of DORI result in an increase of the resolution; the motion of the patient can be controlled by requesting their cooperation and/or by using shims radiolucent. Image distortion Distortion is the deformation of the size or shape of the object projected onto the recording medium radiographic. The primary factors affecting the distortion are: the DFRI, the DORI, the alignment object - image receptor and the alignment/centering of the beam central. With the use of a DFRI correct, minimizing the DORI, ensuring that the object and the image receptor are aligned, and aligning/centering correctly in the radius which is central to the structure to be radiografada, you can control the distortion in a radiographic image. We used the grid antidifusora in all the taken x-ray, since in conventional radiography, a rule says that, when x-raying any object whose thickness is larger than 10 cm is essential to the use of the grid antidifusora1-3 and, thus, on radiographs of the skull this accessory is necessary. Radiographic technique For visualization of the cochlear implant at the time of its installation, are carried out on two issues: x-ray: The 1st Antero-Posterior - AP Skull (Transorbitária) and the 2nd Slanting side 45°, with a radius central (RC) perpendicular to the film. Both of the techniques described here were adapted for performance of the taken x-ray on the surgical table with the patient supine. In Tables 1 and 2 are represented the technical data related to the acquisition of the radiographic images in this study. AP Skull (Transorbitária) Position of the patient With the patient supine, the chassis is placed under the head, aligning the sagittal plane the median at 90 degrees with the horizontal plane, ensuring that there is no rotation and/or tilt of the head (Figure 1). Flexing lightly on the head, depressing the chin until the line órbito-meatal (LOM) is perpendicular to the film (Figure 2). * If necessary, use shims radiotranslucent to ensure that there is no movement during the shooting. Radius, Central Guide the RC perpendicular to the film/grid, parallel to the LOM, directing you to the centre of the orbit on the side of interest. Center the film to the Radius of the Central designed. Make collimation in the outer margins of the skull or, if possible, to use the cylinder extension. If the patient is under mechanical ventilation, not to manipulate it without the supervision of the anesthesiologist and/or surgeon in charge. Result radiological expected A proper positioning will make the maze the bone in the center of the orbit. The absence of rotation of the skull is evidenced by the same distance between the margin of the orbit and the lateral border of the skull on both sides and the same distance from the sagittal plane the median (identified by the crest Galli) to the margin of the orbital external in both lados4,5. Density and contrast adequate to allow visualization of the implant in all its extension, as well as of the structures within the labyrinth bone. The margins of bone, sharp show the absence of movement (Figures 3 and 4). Oblique lateral 45 ° Position of the patient With the patient supine, the chassis is placed under the head, turning the head laterally toward the opposite side to the of interest until the sagittal plane the median make an angle of 45º with the horizontal (Figure 5). Flexing lightly on the head, depressing the chin until the LOM is perpendicular to the film (Figure 6). * If necessary, use shims radiotranslucent to ensure that there is no movement during the shooting. Radius, Central Guide the RC perpendicular to the film/the grid, the entry point will be 2 cm anterior to the external acoustic meatus of the side that is high. Center the film to the Radius of the Central designed. Make collimation in the outer margins of the pyramid petrous of the high side or if possible to use the cylinder extension. NOTE: If the patient is under mechanical ventilation, one should not handle it without the supervision of the anesthesiologist and/or surgeon in charge. Result radiological expected An image positioned correctly demonstrate the following: Condyle mandibular superimposed to the cervical spine. Maze bone below the crest petrous. Margin the posterior branch of the mandibular superimposed on the sidelines later in the column cervical4,6. Density and contrast adequate to allow visualization of the implant in all its extension, as well as of the structures within the labyrinth bone. The margins of bone, sharp show the absence of movement (Figures 7 and 8). RESULTS THE surgeon and later the radiologist evaluated a total of 524 x-rays, which are listed in Table 3. Of the total of x-rays evaluated, 501 (95,61%) had proper technique, the correct positioning of the patient within the technique described in this study, density and contrast adequate, good sharpness, allowing good visualization of the electrodes of the cochlear implant and of the structures of the temporal bone, being considered satisfactory. Of the 524 radiographs evaluated, 23 (arachidic 4.39%) had some form of failure in technique or positioning, density, or contrast inadequate due to technical factors, such as selection of dose, or a failure in processing, or display unsatisfactory of the electrodes (for distortion or lack of sharpness), being considered unsatisfactory. In the period studied, there were isolated cases (approximately 2%) that there was a need for immediate intervention of the surgeon for repositioning of the electrodes due to factors such as false paths (p.ex. introduction in the top channel); compression of electrodes; introducing the partial electrodes extracocleares. Factors which, subsequently, could lead to a stimulation of the facial nerve, as well as hinder and/or preclude the activation of the cochlear implant. DISCUSSION The x-ray to the ear by using the method of stenvers views (oblique-lateral 45°), it is required an inclination of 12 ° within the central meaning of the skull, and the head of the patient should be positioned so that the Line infra-orbito-meatal (LIOM) is perpendicular to the film, with the patient in ventral decubitus. Already in the method Arcelin or stenvers views inverted, which is done with the patient supine, the beam should be tilted 10 in the direction flow and the head of the patient positioned with LIOM perpendicular to the film. This otimizaria the visualization of the structures of the bone temporal1,2,7. The technique described in this study was adapted for use in portable equipment, that requires some accessories peculiar, as chassis fitted with grid antidifusora, which limits the possibility of tilting the beam center. To compensate for this deficiency and obtain a good result, has changed the position of the head of the patient, so that the Line orbito-meatal (LOM) was perpendicular to the film/grid. This study demonstrated that, even using portable equipment, it was possible to obtain radiographs of satisfactory quality for visualization of the cochlear implant in all its extension, as well as the positioning and integrity of the electrodes, serving as a tool of extreme importance for the surgeon (since the tests telemetry electrode impedance, by itself, does not rule out the possibility of false path of the implant), allowing, including, an immediate intervention that minimizes the costs and risks of surgery/anesthesia later, as we can observe in some isolated cases (approximately 2%), in that this intervention was necessary due to bad positioning or compression of the electrodes of the cochlear implant. Alternatives An efficient alternative would be to use a System Digital Fluoroscopic Mobile with Arm C (arc surgical), which is a device with emission of ionizing radiation type X-Rays, trained for radiography and fluoroscopy, consisting of arc C mounted on casters, X-Ray generator, X-Ray tube, control unit, image intensifier and TV system with mobile support, with subtraction of digital images. The images obtained are displayed on a monitor in real time, therefore, is a device very versatile and widely used in orthopedic surgeries, interventions, vascular, neurological, gastrointestinal, urological, among others, especially to guide in the installation of prostheses, catheters, and implants in general. The main advantage in relation to the use of an X-Ray machine portable it is precisely the possibility of immediate viewing of the image, there is no need to wait for the processing. The main disadvantages would be: its high cost; its size is relatively greater, which causes that occupies a considerable space in the operating room, sometimes even requiring adjustments in the rooms and surgical tables to achieve the impact required; and, also, the employment of larger doses of radiation, depending on the exposure time used. CONCLUSION THE x-ray transoperatória of the cochlear implant is a fundamental tool, since it allows the surgeon to evaluate, not only the position but also the integrity of the electrodes, enabling, including, if necessary, an immediate intervention. The use of handheld devices has proved to be a rapid method, convenient and low-cost, accessible to the great majority of hospital centers. 