OBJECTIVE SUMMARY: To evaluate the effects of clonidine on heart rate (HR), blood pressure (BP) and sedation of patients undergoing coronary angiography. METHODS: A prospective clinical trial, double-blind, randomized, controlled trial was conducted with 62 patients undergoing elective coronary angiographies, divided into two groups: clonidine group receiving 0.8 mg /kg of the drug, and the control group receiving saline 0.9%. Sedation was evaluated based on the scale of Ramsay and consumption of meperidine 0.04 mg/kg which was used in patients with agitation or anxiety during the procedure. Invasive BP, HR and sedation score according to the Ramsay scale, were analyzed every 5 minutes and four different times were considered for evaluation: M1- beginning of the examination; M2- 5 minutes after the start of the test; M3- exam time the median and M4 - Final exam. RESULTS: The clonidine group showed greater stability BP and HR and effective sedation, while the control group showed a higher consumption of meperidine (p < 0.05). In the statistical analysis, the inference of continuous variables we used the T or Mann-Whitney test and c2 or Fisher's exact test for categorical variables. CONCLUSION: This study showed that, in patients undergoing coronary angiography, the use of clonidine was an efficient means to control BP and HR and provided a conscious sedation. Keywords: Clonidine, sedation, coronary angiography anesthesia.     The increase in the rate of coronary artery disease has accelerated the development of protocols for diagnosis and treatment of the disease; coronary angiography being one of the most important tests to define the therapeutic decision1. During the coronary angiography patients are under emotional stress and anxiety, which trigger sympathetic responses leading to tachycardia and hypertension, which can be harmful to the patient with suspected coronary failure 1. The use of drugs that control the sympathetic response and bring cardiovascular stability seems to be very useful, and clonidine has pharmacological characteristics that justify a study in this population 2-8. The control of the autonomic response in patients with suspicion of coronary artery disease is already done with the use of beta blockers, whose effectiveness is well known. The alpha2 agonistas, such as clonidine, are being studied. However, the literature lacks studies of its use in invasive procedures. Particularly in angiography, studies about sedation this procedure are few, and the knowledge of the use of alpha2 agonists for the same is scarce2-8. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of clonidine in the blood pressure, heart rate and sedation in patients undergoing coronary angiography.   Methods After approval by the Research Ethics Committee and signing of the informed consent, a prospective clinical trial, double-blind, randomized controlled trial was conducted. Before signing the informed consent of the patients were informed of the routines of the service and the objectives of this work. It was also reported that he could use clonidine and its possible benefits during the examination would be evaluated. Sixty-two patients of both gender, between 18 and 80 years old were admitted to the study, who would perform elective coronary angiography, all with myocardial scintigraphy or positive stress test for ischemia. patients with unstable angina were excluded, body mass index greater than 35; changes in the sensor that prevented the assessment and allergy history to the drugs used. The parameters used in this study were high blood pressure (BP), heart rate (HR) and sedation score according to the scale of Ramsay9 (Tab. 1).     Patients were monitored in the hemodynamics room with pulse oximetry (Criticare 504DX), continuous ECG with six leads and invasive blood pressure through the femoral or brachial artery depending on the approach used in the examination (Polygraph SP12 - TEB®). All patients fasted for at least eight hours and did not receive any kind of tranquilizers. A catheter number 20 was introduced into the cephalic vein of the left upper limb and the standard infusion of 10 ml/kg /h of 0.9% saline solution was performed. Patients were randomly divided using the PEPI program {[COMPUTER PROGRAMS FOR Epidemiologists (PEPI)] by J.H. Abramson and Paul M. Gahlinger. Version 4.04x} into two groups with sealed envelope draw, syringes containing the drug were prepared by a researcher who was not evaluating the patient. When clonidine group was administered 0.8 mg / kg of clonidine diluted in 5 ml of distilled water, and the intravenous control group received 5 ml of 0.9% saline solution, both with standard syringes. The femoral artery puncture was chosen for hospitalized patients and the dissection of the brachial artery for outpatients. After the patients were also monitored with pulse oximetry and continuous ECG, and initiated the evaluation. The HR, BP and sedation were evaluated from the start of the intravenous injection and every 5 minutes until the end of the procedure. There were 15-90 minutes variation in test time depending on the patient and the technical difficulty. So it was necessary to create an evaluation at specific times to correct this. Therefore, were selected four moments for evaluation of BP, HR and sedation scores on the patients: Moment 1 (M1) - before intravenous injection, it would be the control time; Moment 2 (M2) - five minutes after the drug injection; Moment 3 (M3) - median test time; this was chosen as it will occur in half the time of the procedure; and the Moment 4 (M4) - At the end of the test. The complications evaluated were bradycardia and hypotension. Respect to sedation, for ethical reasons, meperidine 0.04 mg/kg was used in patients who remained agitated or anxious after ten minutes of the start of the examination. The use of this drug is one of the parameters of the sedative efficacy of clonidine. After the completion of the exam, patients were observed for at least an hour and a maximum of four hours, would remain hospitalized if there were indications due to severity of the condition or when the femoral artery approach due to the need of rest and locking. Patients who underwent the test via the femoral have high about 24 hours after the procedure, obviously the diagnosis of coronary angiography permitted. Outpatients who were approached with the dissection of the brachial artery could be released from the hospital, if complications during the procedure or severe coronary lesions didn't occur to justify their internment. They were also informed that they should return to service if any complication happened. In presenting the results of continuous variables were described as mean and median, categorical variables by percentage. For inference, the T or Mann-Whitney test were used for the continuous variables, and c2 or Fisher's exact test for categorical variables. Adopting one to 5% (Type I error).   Results No difference was observed in the groups studied in relation to sex, age, weight, height or body mass index (Tab. 2). The study was conducted for six months, the months of July to December 2004 year. The patients in the clonidine group showed less variation in HR and BP than control patients (Fig. 1). Regarding the FC, the statistical analysis of the groups at any time, proved that the M4 the control group showed higher values than the clonidine group (p < 0.05), with no significant differences in previous times. In the analysis of the differences between the moments in each group, the results were statistically evaluated, the clonidine group showed M1=M2=M3=M4, while the control group M4>(M1=M3)>M2 (Fig. 1). Systolic blood pressure (SBP), the comparison of groups at each time showed that only M1 groups did not differ, and in later times the control group showed statistically greater (p < 0.05) to the clonidine group. Statistical analysis of the differences between the moments in each group, the clonidine group showed M1 > (M2 = M3 = M4) while the control group M1 > (M2 = M3) > M4 (Fig. 1).  In The diastolic blood pressure (DBP) the analysis of the differences between the groups, in each moment, revealed that only M1 groups were similar and in M2, M3 and M4 control group showed higher values than the clonidine group (p < 0, 05). The difference between the moments in each group, the clonidine group showed M1 > (M2 = M3 = M4) and the control group M3 > (M1 = M2) > M4 (Fig. 1). In what the sedative behavior meperidine consumption is concerned, it was greater in the control group having twelve patients using this feature against four patients in the clonidine group (p < 0.05) (Fig. 2). The sedation scores between the two groups showed no statistically significant difference (Fig. 3).     Regarding the study times the average examination time was 25.73 ± 10.45 min. And three times, which was the median of the examination time was 15.20 ± 10.94 min. No patient had hypertension that required treatment and only two patients who received clonidine had to treat bradycardia with atropine 0.01 mg/kg, but without statistical significance. Of the patients undergoing this study only three remained hospitalized and that was because of the severity of coronary lesions, and of these one was ambulatory.   Discussion The clonidine proved to be an effective drug to control BP and HR with a slight sedative effect, which is desirable in the catheterization laboratory. For the sample size calculation of the following parameters were used: error of 5%, 80% power, with the mean difference between the groups 16 mmHg in systolic blood pressure, a standard deviation of 20.22 mmHg in the control group and 22.58 mmHg in the test group. With these parameters reached a minimum sample size of 30 patients for each group. Invasive BP monitoring, femoral or brachial, is routine in coronary angiography and is a very reliable method of assessment of blood pressure. It used the Ramsay scale for assessment of sedation, because it is widely used by several authors and works in anesthesiology and intensive care and has been shown to be an established method in quality assessment sedação9-11. Since the mean procedure time was of 25.73 to 10.45 min, four point evaluations in this range were sufficient to consider the majority of existing variations. The clonidine dose of 0.8 mg/kg is lower than that used in literature (usually higher than 1μg/kg). Some authors argue that doses, as used in this work, are effective in controlling the PA and FC12,13. Respect to bradycardia and hypertension that would be the most anticipated complications with the use of clonidine was not observed any patients with hypertension and only two patients had bradycardia, showing no statistical significance. Regarding the behavior of HR and BP the clonidine group had mean and standard deviations less variation (Fig. 1). Similarly, both systolic and diastolic blood pressure decreased progressively in the clonidine group, while the control group values remained higher and had more variation between times. The presence of a control moment (M1) was important because it validated the homogeneity of the groups before the interference of the researcher. All parameters were similar between the two groups, with no statistically significant differences (p > 0.05). The M2 brought us the idea that there would be an immediate effect of clonidine by intravenous and at least blood pressure, showed a statistically significant difference between the groups at this time (p < 0.05) (Fig. 1). In M3 there was BP statistical difference between the two groups (p < 00.5), the FC had lower values in the clonidine group, however without statistical significance (p > 0.05) (Img. 1). In both M4 BP and HR had statistical differences (p < 0.05) between groups (Img. 1). It is interesting to note the importance of the reduction of the myocardium oxygen consumption in patients who have coronary artery disease, because in it the higher the heart rate and blood pressure, the greater the work of the heart and the risk of ischemia 1. Obviously since the HR and BP values remain within the physiological range that is interesting because if hypertension risk of ischemia increases. Because no patient in this group had hypotension, we assume that the dose of clonidine used was satisfactory. Some authors refer to the potential of alpha2agonists such as clonidine, to decrease the cardiovascular morbidity14,15. This point is controversial and requires more work with good methodological quality and a larger number of patients to reach more concrete conclusions. There is no consensus in the literature on sedation of patients in the catheterization laboratory, although some authors describe the need for cooperation during the examination and question whether sedation could take the responsiveness of patients and jeopardize the attainment of procedure 16. This can be challenged by the existence of the technique of conscious sedation. It is defined as conscious sedation pharmacological state of depressed consciousness that enables the maintenance of protective reflexes. The patient, although sedated, is awake enough to properly respond to physical stimulation or verbal orders. During conscious sedation, the patient maintain their respiratory function unassisted or estimulação16, 17. Clonidine has sedative effect depends on the dose used and their site of action is the locus ceruleus, small neuronal nucleus located in the upper part of the brainstem. This effect has been described by various authors and it is important to note that the sedative effect is not a consequence of hypertension or any effect cardiovascular12,18. For ethical reasons it was necessary to be a sedation option for patients who remained anxious during the procedure. So the meperidine option was used. This is a drug widely used for sedation in various procedures and represented, while an evaluation parameter of the sedação19,20 quality. It can be argued that the use of meperidine hinder the assessment of sedation in patients. However, 38% (12 patients) in the control group used this feature and only 12% (4 patients) in the clonidine group (Fig. 2). Certainly, this was the reason there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups in the evaluation of Ramsay scale scores (Fig. 3). But if we consider the patients who used meperidine as anxious, the control group begins to show difference (p < 0.05) with the clonidine. Indeed, decreased anxiety influenced the progressive reduction of the evaluated parameters. This was observed the existence of the control group, but the clonidine group showed a more intense and progressive decrease in the control, suggesting the role of the drug influencing the cardiovascular and sedative data, whereas the sedative effect started later than cardiovascular effects (Figs. 1 and 3). This dissociation of cardiovascular and sedative effects of clonidine has been described. However, studies have reported the effects of clonidine are initiated at about 10 to 15 minutes after its intravenous injection. In this assignment, we find evidence that there were at least influences on BP in five minutes. The number of national studies on sedation in coronary angiography is small and with this work we hope to contribute to increase methodologically conducted experiments and to improve the care of patients with coronary risk. From a practical point of view, we began the discussion of the improvement of the patient's medical care which is submitted to the coronary angiography. Today there is no consensus even if these patients should be sedados16 and this work show benefits in the control of BP and HR, and there was no technical damage in the procedure because patients sedated despite continued collaborative. In the next time we will compare clonidine with benzodiazepines which have been described in the literature for this procedure, however, they have not yet been compared16. As this study did not evaluate morbidity and mortality of coronary angiography associated with sedation, we evaluated the complications associated with drug use in this procedure which were hypertension and bradycardia. Therefore, this study showed that; in patients undergoing coronary angiography, the use of clonidine was an efficient mean to control BP and HR and provided a conscious sedation that is desired for this type of procedure.   Acknowledgments We thank our teacher and friend, Carlos Wilson Marques, for his contribution during the preparation of this assignment.   