 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Evaluate the effects of clonidine on heart rate (HR), blood pressure (bp) and sedation of patients submitted to coronary angiography. METHODS: A clinical trial is a prospective, double-blind, randomized, controlled, was conducted with 62 patients undergoing cineangiocoronariografias electives, divided into two groups: group clonidine that was used at 0.8 µg/kg of the drug, and the control group used physiological solution of 0.9%. Sedation was evaluated based on the scale of Ramsay and the consumption of meperidine 0.04 mg/kg that was used in the patients who had agitation or anxiety during the procedure. The PA invasive, the FC and the score of sedation, according to the scale of Ramsay, were analyzed every 5 minutes and four different moments were considered for the evaluation: M1 - the beginning of the examination; M2 - 5 minutes after the start of the exam; M3 median time of the exam and M4 - the end of the examination. RESULTS: THE group clonidine had a greater stability of the PA and FC and the effectiveness of sedation, while the control group presented a higher consumption of meperidine (p<0.05). In the statistical analysis for inference of the continuous variables was used the T test or the Mann-Whitney test and the c2 or Fisher's Exact Test for categorical variables. CONCLUSION: This work showed that, in patients submitted to coronary angiography, the use of clonidine was effective both in the control of the PA and FC and providing conscious sedation. Key words: Clonidine, sedation, coronary angiography, anesthesia. The increase in the incidence of coronary artery disease has accelerated the development of protocols for the diagnosis and therapy of this disease, the coronary angiography one of the most important exams to set the decision terapêutica1. During the performance of coronary angiography the patients are under emotional stress and anxiety, which trigger responses in the sympathetic leading to tachycardia and hypertension, which can be harmful to the patient with suspected failure coronariana1. The use of drugs that control the sympathetic response and to provide stability the cardiovascular seems to be very useful, and the clonidine has pharmacological characteristics that justify a study in the população2-8. The control of the response of autonomic in a patient with suspected coronary heart disease is already carried out with the use of beta-blockers, whose efficacy is well conhecida8. The alfa2 agonists such as clonidine are being studied. However the literature lacks studies of its use in procedures invasivos5,8. Particularly in coronary angiography studies about sedation in this procedure are few and the knowledge of the use of alfa2-agonists during the same is pobre2-8. In this way the objective of this work was to evaluate the effects of clonidine under blood pressure, heart rate, and sedation in patients undergoing coronary angiography. Methods After approval by the Research Ethics Committee and signing of informed consent, a clinical trial is a prospective, double-blind, randomized and controlled was conducted. Before signing the informed consent the patients were informed of the routines of the service and of the objectives of the present work. It was also reported that he could use clonidine and its possible benefits during the examination would be assessed. Sixty-two patients of both sexes, between 18 and 80 years of age were admitted to the study, all of which perform coronary angiography elective, all with myocardial scintigraphy or stress test positive for ischemia. Excluded were patients with unstable angina, body mass index greater than 35; the amendment of the sensory that prevented the assessment and history of allergy to the drugs used. The parameters used in this study were blood pressure (bp), heart rate (HR) and the score of sedation according to the scale of Ramsay9 (Tab. 1). The patients were monitored in the living room of hemodynamics with pulse oximetry (spot-checks 504DX), electrocardiography continuous with six taps, and blood pressure invasive through the femoral artery or brachial depending on the approach used in the examination (Polygraph SP12 - TEB®). All patients were fasting for at least eight hours and do not received any kind of medication anxiolytic. A catheter number 20 was inserted in the cephalic vein of the left upper extremity, and the infusion of 10 ml/ kg/ h saline 0.9% was performed. The patients were divided randomly using the program PEPI {[COMPUTER PROGRAMS FOR EPIDEMIOLOGISTS (PEPI)] by J. H. Abramson and Paul M. Gahlinger. Version 4.04 x}, into two groups, with the draw of a sealed envelope, the syringes containing the drug were prepared by a researcher who was not assessing the patient. To the group, clonidine was administered at 0.8 µg/kg of clonidine diluted in 5 ml of distilled water, via the venous, and the control group received 5 ml of 0.9% saline solution, both with syringes-standard. The puncture of the femoral artery was chosen for the in-patients in the hospital and the dissection of the brachial artery to the patient. After, patients were also monitored with pulse oximetry and electrocardiography, continuous, and initiated the evaluation. The HR, bp and sedation were assessed from the beginning of the injection vein, and every 5 minutes until the end of the procedure. There has been a change from 15 to 90 minutes at the time of the examination depending on the patient and the technical difficulty. Therefore it was necessary to create an assessment in specific moments to correct this aspect. Therefore, there were chosen four times for the evaluation of the PA, FC and scores of sedation in patients: Moment 1 (M1)- prior to the injection of the vein, it would be the control moment; Moment 2 (M2)- five minutes after the injection of the drug; Moment 3 (M3)- the median of the time of the exam; this was chosen because it would occur in half the time of the procedure; and the moment 4 (M4)- the end of the examination. The complications assessed were bradycardia and hypotension. With regard to sedation, for ethical reasons, meperidine 0.04 mg/kg was used in the patients who remained agitated or anxious after ten minutes of the beginning of the examination. Being the use of this drug is one of the parameters of effectiveness sedative of clonidine. After the completion of examination the patients were observed at least during one hour and a maximum of four hours, and could remain hospitalized if there were an indication due to the severity of the pathology, or when the approach of the femoral artery due to the need of rest and immobilization. The patients who performed the examination via the femoral artery would have high about 24 hours after the procedure, obviously if the diagnosis of coronary angiography would allow. The outpatient clinics that were approached with the dissection of the brachial artery could be released from the hospital, the case does not occur complications during the procedure, or severity of injury to the coronary to justify their internment. They were also informed that they should return to the service if it were any complications. In the presentation of the results the continuous variables were described using mean and median, and categorical variables by percentage. For inference, the T-test or the Mann-Whitney test were used in continuous variables and the c2 or Fisher's Exact Test for categorical variables. Adopting an a of 5% (type I Error). Results No difference was observed in the studied groups with respect to sex, age, height, weight, or body mass index (Tab. 2). The study was carried out during six months, the months of July to December of the year of 2004. The patients in the group with clonidine showed a smaller variation of the FC and PA patients in the control group (Fig. 1). With respect to FC, the statistical analysis of the groups at each time showed that in M4 the control group presented higher values than the group clonidine (p<0.05), with no significant differences in the earlier moments. In the analysis of the differences between times in each group, the results were statistically evaluated the group clonidine presented M1=M2=M3=M4 while the control group M4> (M1=M3)>M2 (Fig. 1). In systolic blood pressure (SBP), the comparison of the groups at each time showed that only in M1, the groups did not differ, and in later times the control group presented values statistically higher (p<0.05) to the group clonidine. In the statistical analysis of the differences between times in each group, the group clonidine presented M1> (M2=M3=M4) while in the control group M1> (M2=M3)>M4 (Fig. 1). In diastolic blood pressure (DBP) the analysis of the differences between the groups at each time revealed that only in M1 of both groups were similar in M2, M3 and M4, the control group presented higher values than the group clonidine (p<0.05). The difference between times in each group, the group clonidine presented M1> (M2=M3=M4) and the control group M3> (M1=M2)>M4 (Fig. 1). With respect to the behavior sedative the consumption of meperidine was higher in the control group there are twelve patients who have used this feature against the four patients in group a clonidine (p<0.05) (Fig. 2). The scores of sedation between the two groups did not show statistically significant difference (Fig. 3). With respect to the moments of the study the average time of examination was 25,73±10,45 min. And the time three, which was the median time of the examination, was of 15.20 ± 10,94 min. No patient experienced hypotension that needed treatment and only two patients that have used clonidine needed to treat bradycardia with atropine 0.01 mg/kg, however without statistical significance. Of the patients subjected to this study, only 3 remained hospitalized and this due to the severity of the injury to coronary heart, being that of these one was an outpatient. Discussion clonidine has been shown to be a drug effective in the control of the PA and FC having a sedative effect unobtrusive, which is desirable in the laboratory of hemodynamics. For the calculation of sample size were used the following parameters: error of 5%, power of 80%, having as difference of average between groups of 16 mmHg in systolic blood pressure, a standard deviation of 20,22 mmHg in the control group and 22,58 mmHg in the test group. With these parameters had a minimum sample size of 30 patients for each group. The invasive monitoring of the arterial pressure, via the femoral or brachial, is routine in coronary angiography and it is a method very trusted assessment of blood pressure. It was used the scale of Ramsay for the evaluation of the sedation, because it is widely used by a number of authors and papers in anesthesiology and intensive care and has been shown to be a method enshrined in the quality assessment of sedação9-11. As the average time of examination was 25,73 ± 10,45 min, four evaluations punctual in this range have been sufficient to behold the greater part of the variations. The dose of clonidine 0.8 ág/kg is lower than the one used in the literature (usually greater than 1µg/kg). Some authors argue that the doses, as used in this work, are effective in the control of the PA and FC12,13. With respect to bradycardia and hypotension that would be the complications to be expected with the use of clonidine, there was no patient with hypotension, and only two patients who presented with bradycardia, not presenting statistical significance. With respect to the behavior of the FC and PA to the group clonidine had averages and standard deviations with less variance (Fig. 1). In the same way in both systolic blood pressure and the diastolic decreased progressively in group a clonidine while in the control group the values remained higher, and with greater variation between times. The presence of a control moment (M1) was important because it validated the homogeneity of the groups before the interference of the researcher. All parameters evaluated were similar between the two groups, with no statistically significant difference (p>0.05). The M2 brought us the idea that there would be an immediate effect of clonidine via the venous and, at least in the blood pressure, showed a statistically significant difference in the comparison of the groups at this time (p<0.05) (Fig. 1). In M3, there was a difference statistic of the PA between the two groups (p<00,5), the FC presented the lowest values in the group of clonidine, however without statistical significance (p>0.05) (Fig. 1). In M4, both the PA and the FC had statistical differences (p<0.05) between the groups (Fig. 1). It is interesting to highlight the importance of the reduction in the consumption of oxygen by the myocardium in patient who has coronary artery disease, for in it the higher the heart rate and blood pressure, the greater the work of the heart and the greater the risk of isquemia1. Obviously since the values of FC and PA remain within the physiologic range and this is interesting, because if there is hypotension, the risk of ischemia increases. As no patient in this group presented hypotension we assume that the dose of clonidine used was satisfactory. Some authors refer to the potential of the alfa2agonistas, such as clonidine, to decrease the morbidity cardiovascular14,15. This point is still controversial and needs of the largest number of jobs with good methodological quality and with greater number of patients to reach more concrete conclusions. There is no consensus in the literature about sedation for patients in the laboratory of hemodynamics, however, some authors describe the need for cooperation during the examination, and question whether the sedation would take away the responsiveness of the patients, and undermine the attainment of the procedimento16. This aspect can be challenged by the existence of the technique of conscious sedation. Defines conscious sedation as the state pharmacological depression of consciousness that allows for the maintenance of the reflex shields. The patient, although sedated, is awake enough to respond correctly to physical stimulation or orders, verbal. During conscious sedation, the patient will maintain their respiratory function without help or estimulação16, 17. Clonidine has sedative effect which depends on the dose used and its site of action is the locus ceruleus, a small nucleus neuron located in the upper part of the brain stem. This effect was already described by several authors and it is important to note that the sedative effect is not a consequence of hypotension or any effect cardiovascular12,18. For ethical reasons it was necessary for there to be an option of sedation for patients who remain anxious during the procedure. So the option of meperidine was used. This is a drug widely used for sedation in various procedures, and represented, at the same time, a parameter of evaluation of the quality of the sedação19,20. It can be claimed that the use of meperidine, leading to difficulty in the assessment of sedation in the patients. However 38% (12 patients) in the control group used this feature and only 12% (4 patients) in group clonidine (Fig. 2). Certainly this was the reason why there is no statistically significant difference between the two groups in the evaluation of the scores of the scale of Ramsay (Fig. 3). But if we consider patients that have used meperidine as eager, the control group will then present difference (p< 0.05) with respect to the group clonidine. Certainly, the decrease in anxiety influenced the progressive reduction of the evaluated parameters. This was observed with the existence of the control group, but the group clonidine showed a decrease more intense and progressive than the control, which suggests the role of the drug influencing the data cardiovascular and sedatives, and the sedative effect started later than the cardiovascular effects (Figs. 1 and 3). This dissociation of the sedative effect and the effect of cardiovascular of clonidine has been described. However, the jobs report that the effects of clonidine begin around 10 to 15 minutes after the injection of the vein. In this work with five minutes, we find evidence that there were influences at least on the PA. The number of work national sedation in coronary angiography is small, and with this work we hope to contribute to increasing the experiences methodologically carried out so as to improve the care of patients with coronary risk. From the practical point of view, we began the discussion of the improvement of medical care of the patient is subjected to coronary angiography. Today there is no consensus even if these patients should be sedados16 and with this work we show benefits in control of bp and HR, as well as there was no prejudice to the technician in the completion of the procedure, because the patients while sedated, continued collaborative. In a next time we will compare clonidine with benzodiazepines that have already been described in the literature for this procedure, however, have not yet been comparados16. As this work had for objective to evaluate mortality and morbidity of coronary angiography is associated with sedation, we evaluated the complications associated with the use of the drug in this procedure, which were hypotension and bradycardia. Therefore, this work showed that; in patients submitted to coronary angiography, the use of clonidine was effective both in the control of the PA and FC, and to provide a conscious sedation that is desired for this type of procedure. Acknowledgments we are grateful to our friend professor Carlos Wilson Marques by the loans during the elaboration of this work. 