 BACKGROUND SUMMARY: The standardization of default images used in medicine was conducted in 1993 through the DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine). Several tests use this standard and softwares are increasingly required to be able to handle this kind of image, but such softwares usually do not have free and open source format, and this hampers their adjustment to the most different interests. OBJECTIVE: To develop and validate a free software and open source able to manipulate DICOM images of coronary CT angiography exams. METHODS: We developed and tested the software named ImageLab in the evaluation of 100 randomly selected exams using a database. They carried out 600 tests divided by two observers using ImageLab and other software marketed to the CT scanners Philips Brilliance in assessing the presence of coronary injuries and plaques in the trunk of Left Coronary (TCE) Territories and Artery Anterior Descending (ADA). To evaluate intraobserver, interobserver and intersoftware concordances, we use simple agreement and Kappa statistic. RESULTS: The concordances observed between the softwares were generally classified as substantial or almost perfect in most comparisons. CONCLUSION: The ImageLab software agreed with the Philips software on the evaluation of coronary CT angiography scans, especially in patients without injuries, with less than 50% injuries in TBI and less than 70% in the ADA. The agreement to the injury > 70% in the ADA was lower, but it is also observed when the anatomical reference standard is used. Keywords: Image Diagnostic; Computed tomography; coronary vessels; validation of computer programs. Introduction: In medicine, a specific image standard called DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) is used. This standard was developed to enable communication between softwares and hardwares related with that process. The DICOM format, standardized1 in 1993 by the Congress RSNA (Radiological Society of North America), aimed the standardization of the rules that medical information is transmitted and saved2-4. The visualization and processing of medical images are made through specific softwares. Many of these resources are not available for free or are sold with the equipment, but it is not usual to find free and open source softwares for this image format. The public domain of a medical software technology could reduce costs, standardize the multi use, allow continuous development and enable the development of several lines of research, and some believe that this format could contribute to the reduction of social differences between countries5. The National Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine Assisted by Scientific Computing (INCT-MACC) involves 33 national institutions in 11 states, totaling 128 researchers. One of the research areas of the INCT-MACC is the medical image processing, which will allow the acquisition of information to improve the computational modeling of the human cardiovascular system, also being developed by INCT-MACC. For this purpose a free and open-source software called ImageLab was designed. This software would be user-friendly requiring better assessment. The aim of the study was to develop and evaluate the reliability, compliance and reproducibility of the new software over another in current use in coronary angiography equipment. Methods In collaborative work of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ) with the National Laboratory for Scientific Computing (LNCC), a software for DICOM image analysis was developed. This free open source software is called ImageLab and has created tools for analysis and processing of coronary CT angiography images. From a population of 6,216 patients who underwent coronary angiography examination between May 2005 and December 2010, we applied the inclusion criteria, that is, patients with complete data recorded in the database created in 2008 and 2,895 patients were selected. Later on, after applying the exclusion criteria (stent presence in the left main coronary artery or anterior descending artery - ADA, surgical clip due to coronary artery bypass surgery and patients who did not have images stored on the servers), 534 cases were selected (Figure 1). Through the site randon.org we perform random selection withdrawing 120 of 534 patients, and use the first 100 cases. All patients had their identifying data replaced with consecutive numbers, by people who were not involved in the analysis of the images blinding it. Raw data of coronary angiography images were used, obtained using CTs available in the service (GE lightspeed VTC 64 and 32, Philips Brilliance 64, 40 and 16). All pictures followed standard protocol acquisition using similar techniques. All 100 tests were analyzed by two softwares. The Philips Brilliance software, purchased along with the cardiovascular package (standalone workstation available for DICOM type image analysis). And the ImageLab software developed in this project, installed on the same Worsktation (to neutralize the possible variation of processing power if they were installed on computers with different capacity). We chose the trunk of the left coronary artery and the ADA due to their clinical significance and to enable the analysis, since the use of all the 16 segments would result in too many variables. We followed the nomenclature proposed by AHA relating to segments 5, 6, 7 and 86. The evaluation of the presence of coronary lesions larger or smaller than 50% was used for the segment 5 (left main coronary artery) and the other segments (LAD) use 70% cuts. Additionally, the following variables were also recorded: presence of calcified, partially calcified (in each segment) and non-calcified atherosclerotic plaques; subjective quality of images; time of image analysis (recorded by observer 1  The image analysis was done by viewing the selected orthogonal planes, from the image block in three dimensional space, starting from the analysis in transverse plane of the chest, from the head to the feet, in order to visualize the aortic artery, the origin of the trunk of the left coronary artery and the ADA. The ratings for the stenosis' degree follow the pattern analysis where the filling failure by the contrasted vessel defines the presence of injury. The analysis of the type of board responsible for the damage was done subjectively. The characterization of plaques was carried out according to their morphology and signal intensity, following the traditional scale used in CT scans, the Hounsfield scale (HU) 7. The plates were classified as calcified (tissue adjacent to the vessel with more signal strength that the vessel contrasted - Signal > 130 HU); Noncalcified (tissue adjacent to the vessel with less signal the vessel contrasted - Sign < -50 HU); and partly calcified (heterogeneous content). The two software feature a tool for location and analysis of any three-dimensional point. This tool was used to assess the vessel, in its axial plane (view from within the vessel) in all their extension, and when there is the presence of plaques and coronary lesions, all the orthogonal planes may be used simultaneously in exact topography where these findings may be. Analysis of Images Two observers with up to five years experience, equivalent to level 3 competence clínica8, used commercial software Philips and ImageLab, installed on the same computer, to analyze the ADA segment according to the variables described in Table 1. To avoid measurement bias, the analysis of the software occurred at intervals longer than 15 days. A total of 600 analyzes were performed to evaluate the intraobserver, interobserver and intersoftware concordances. Statistical Analysis Descriptive Analysis as numeric variables in the form of mean +/- standard deviation. Categorical variables as number (n) and percentages (%). Kappa statistics is able to calculate the interobserver and intraobserver reproducibility, all with a 95% confidence interval and simple concordance to measure cases with a small degree of concordance. The software used was R for Linux. We used Table 1 to assess the degree of consistency between the agreements9. Results After the random selection of 120 cases, 7 cases that scored less than 100 were excluded due to lack of contrast examination (calcium score tests without coronary computed tomography angiography). A total of 100 scans with number from 1 to 107 were included for the 600 analyzes divided by the observers and softwares. (All results of the concordances obtained by the program R for Linux can be accessed by the link http://cl.ly/3c193e0j1o1m0f360u1d). The result of the ImageLab version used in this project turned out appropriate, presenting convenient visuals and usability (Figure 2). All the 100 studied patients underwent the tests between July 2009 and November 2010, the majority were male (65) and the average age was 58 years (23 to 85). The average body mass index was 27 kg/m2, ranking the average population overweight (25% classified as obese). Only 15% of the population did not have any risk factor, and 35% were asymptomatic (Table. 2). The most frequent symptom observed was the presence of atypical pain for Coronary Artery Disease (CAD), and most test indications were performed to evaluate any symptoms. 

 It is noteworthy that 36% of the patients were referred because of the presence of altered functional test, and 16% for risk stratification (routine assessment unrelated to the symptoms or abnormal tests); only 2%, to exclude the diagnosis of atherothrombotic disease as etiology of cardiomyopathy; and 2% in the preoperative evaluation (evaluation of cardiovascular surgical risk). The observer 1 used an electronic device clipboard format (tablet Apple® - Ipad 64Gb Wifi) to record the analysis by Bento® software for Ipad. This allowed registering the time of simple analysis (Table 3). The total time of the analyses performed by observer 1 was approximately 6.8 hours, distributed across 14 days. The average time spent in each analysis was 2 minutes and 4 seconds (from 21 to 612 seconds). The average time spent with ImageLab software for the analysis of all patients was 226.2 minutes, while with the Philips Brilliance software was 180.9 (20% less). The second analysis made by both software was faster, with a decreased total time up to 11.9 minutes and 10.7 minutes for the software ImageLab and Philips Brilliance respectively. The subjective quality of recorded images by score 1 to 3; 1 low quality, 2 intermediate quality, and 3 high quality. Twenty-four percent of the images were classified as low quality; 64.2% as intermediate, and 11.8%, as high quality (76% with intermediate or high quality).
 To evaluate the intraobserver and interobserver concordance, we use the simple agreement (sum of concordant findings due to the total number of cases), in the presence of little or no discordant case (heterogeneous distribution in the 2 x 2 table with few or no cases in one of the houses), and using kappa statistics (Table 1) as a reference to the level of agreement between the results8. The average of the 600 analyzes observations (Table 3) demonstrated no lesion in the trunk of the left coronary artery in 82%, and 49.3% in ADA. Less than 1% with lesions > 50% in the trunk of left coronary artery and 9% with lesion > 70% in some segment of the ADA. The most observed type of plaque was the calcified one. It was possible to perform the analysis of agreement using Kappa, for all types of comparison (intraobserver, interobserver, and intersoftware), in the following variables: absence of lesion and lesion > 50% in the left main coronary artery; absence of lesion in the ADA and > 70% in the middle third of this artery (Table 4). 
 In the evaluation of the plates, Kappa can be performed only with calcified plaque variable in the left main coronary artery (Table 5). The other agreements were made by the measure of simple agreement. In order to evaluate the intra-observer agreement, we compared the analyses performed by observer 1 with ImageLab software at time 1 and ImageLab at time 2, as well as the Philips Brilliance software at time 1 and Philips Brilliance in time 2 All evaluations measured by Kappa or by simple agreement at the trunk of the left coronary artery were above 60.  Only the variable injury >70% in the mid third of the descending artery, in the interobserver evaluation by Philips Brilliance, presented moderate agreement (49.7 - 13.8 to 85.6). All the other agreements observed in the left ADA were higher than 609. The evaluation absence of injuries and injury < 50% in the left main coronary artery, as well as the injury's assessment > 70% in the middle third of the ADA showed greater intraobserver agreement by the software Philips Brilliance, the other remained similar. The intersoftware analysis showed a concordance higher than 80 for all measurements performed by Kappa, except for injury assessment > 70% in the middle third of ADA (79.6 to 63.6 to 95.7), while all single intersoftware agreements were higher than 80. When analyzed the most frequent observations and the higher clinical significance (Table 6), it was possible to use Kappa, which showed a higher concordance for the identification of injury absence (Kappa greater than 90 for all comparisons), also on the calcified plaques identification presented a substantial concordance degree. Concordance decreases when assessing significant ADA lesions (> 70%) for which the worst kappa was 47.8 for the inter-observer assessment with ImageLab software. Discussion: Our study used patients referred by their doctors, for various clinical indications needing coronary angiography. These patients found in the daily routine of the private services directed to this type of examination usually have a low to intermediate probability of disease and use the high negative predictive value of the exam10 to exclude the diagnosis. We noted that in the population studied, only 9% had chest pain typical of coronary artery disease and when we evaluated the results of calcium scores of the same population (not used in the assessments), only 20% had values above the 75th percentile for sex and age, which is associated with a higher overall risk for cardiovascular events11. The use of patients referred for indications of cardiological practice allows the viability of this project, but it can pose a problem. The lack of all types of injury and plates by coronary segments is certainly a limitation to the analysis of concordances. In these cases it was possible only to perform simple agreement because the Kappa needs a more varied distribution of findings to be calculated. One way to fix this problem would be the inclusion of patients distributed by injuries and plaques, in order to force the varied input of all kinds of findings. This approach would change the profile of the population to be studied, which would certainly be different from the population seen in everyday life, which is referred by physicians for clarification of an uncertain diagnosis.
 The evaluation of only one part of the examination (phase contrast) without clinical data of patients, possibly decreases the capacity of observers in the interpretation of images. This may interfere with test report and perhaps even in medical management, but our goal was not to assess how accurate is the new software in relation to the standard reference (coronary angiography), but compare it with other widely used software. We did not find any specific scientific validation for the Philip's software in our review, but we believe that its regular use in clinical practice and in scientific works allows us to conclude that there is some sort of validation for that software. This work was motivated by the line of research funded by Faperj computer modeling of the cardiovascular system. Its future objective is to use ImageLab in coronary CT angiography exams in DICOM format and possibly other exams in this format. The subjective evaluation of the degree of injury, using a representative picture of an artery that is constantly moving and is generally smaller than 3 mm can be difficult. Moreover, viewing a complex structure in three-dimensional space expressed by a two-dimensional shape image is a challenge to accuracy.  The lesion degree estimated with these limitations will define the clinical conduct to be followed in several cases.
 Despite the lower accuracy when compared with cine angiography (CA) in coronary angiography it is possible to analyze the image in four dimensions (three dimensions plus the time of a cardiac cycle) and it possibly facilitates compliance with the CA, which is reflected in a high sensitivity and specificity for coronary angiography with values greater than 90% 9. We got a good agreement in most of the analyzes and the direct evaluation of the software. This agreement was higher in intra-observer evaluation, which was expected. Another predictable given was greater agreement in the case of absence of injury. The worst evaluation occurred among observers with ImageLab software, concerning the injury analysis > 70% in ADA (Kappa 47.8). This discrepancy could be explained in part by the difficult to subjectively quantify some cases and the different interpretations of where the injury is located, that is, even when there was a correct assessment of a particular injury, this information was not recorded correctly if it occurs in different segments (lesions > 70% in ADA at the intersection of the proximal and middle segment, being interpreted in the previous segment or interpreted as being in the middle segment). Despite the limitation of the studied population described above, the simple concordances performed in cases with few observations of injury and plates were always very good. The lack of this information may prejudice the external validity of the software for more rare finds, but the vast majority of patients who are referred for this exam do not see these changes. In the analysis of agreements with greater clinical significance and more frequent observations (Table 6) we also observed greater agreement for the observation of absence of lesions in the ADA, with Kappa always >90.  In this same table, we observed lower agreement for lesion >70% and in the identification of calcified plaques.  These data are consistent with the characteristics of coronary angiography, of which use is more appropriate to rule out the presence of lesions and plaques, in other words, the method is more accurate and is more reliable when coronary alterations are observed.

 When we look in the literature evaluating the agreements with CAT, despite the use of anatomical reference standard, there is wide variation, with Kappa between 36-63 for detailed dichotomous measures the degree of injury (0, 1 - 50, 51 - 69 and > 70) and Kappa 37-82 for less detailed dichotomous measures (< 70 or > 70) 12. Another interesting data using two observers is the change in interpretation of a previous report of a CAT when compared to a recent evaluation, with moderate agreement and Kappa ranging between 54 and 60 among observers. This occurs even when the recent concordance between these observers is good (Kappa 69) 13. This data may be related to the information available to the observer of the images during the time of the analysis (images associated with clinical history, the context of the examination, previous exams and symptoms), when compared with the analysis of images without prior information about the patients. In our study, the absence of patient information, including identification, characteristics of pain, precordial, result of functional tests and evaluation of calcium score, may have influenced the interpretation of images, but our goal was not to approve a clinical report, but to compare software applications. Conclusion We observed very good agreements between the two software, both in the intra-observer evaluation and the inter observer evaluation. The evaluation of intersoftwares agreements, in lesions and plaques analysis in general, is higher than 80. The ImageLab software agrees with the Philips software in the evaluation of coronary CT angiography exams, has great potential in helping clinical practice and research in this area, despite the need for a more robust evaluation. It can be used as a tool in the research field of computer modeling of the cardiovascular system and possibly other fields related to images in the DICOM format. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare I have no relevant potential conflicts of interest. Sources of Funding This study had no external sources of funding. Study Association This article is part of Master's thesis Marcelo Souza Hadlich the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.   