 SUMMARY background: the standardization of THE default images used inside the medicine was carried out in 1993 by means of the standard DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine). Several tests use this standard and are increasingly required software able to handle this type of image, but these software do not usually have the format free and open source, and this hinders their adjustment to the most different interests. OBJECTIVE: to Develop and validate a free software and open source code able to manipulate DICOM images of scans of angiotomografia of coronary. METHODS: we Developed and tested the software titled ImageLab in the evaluation of 100 tests selected randomly through a database. Were carried out 600 scans divided by two observers using the ImageLab and other software sold with the apparatus of computed tomography Philips Brilliance, in the evaluation of the presence of lesions and coronary plaques in the territories of the Trunk of the Coronary Left (TEC) and in the Artery Descending Anterior (ADA). To evaluate the concordance intraobservador, interobservadores and intersoftware, we use correlation and simple statistical Kappa. RESULTS: The concordance observed between the software were generally classified as substantial or almost perfect in most comparisons. CONCLUSION: THE software ImageLab agreed with the Philips software in the evaluation of tests angiotomografia of the coronary arteries, especially in patients without lesions, with lesions less than 50% in the TEC and lower than 70% in the ADA. The correlation for lesion >70% in the ADA was lower, but this is also observed when using the reference standard anatomical. Key words: Diagnostic imaging; computed tomography; coronary vessels; validation of computer programs. Introduction In the medical field uses a specific pattern image called DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine). This standard was developed to facilitate communication between the software and hardware related to this process. The format DICOM, padronizado1 in 1993 with the congress of the RSNA (Radiological Society of North America), had as its goal the standardization of the rules with which the medical information is transmitted and armazenadas2-4. Visualization and processing of medical images are performed by means of specific software. A large part of these resources is not available free of charge or is sold together with the equipment, however, is not common to find free software and of open code for this image format. The public domain of the technology of a medical software could decrease costs, standardize the use multicenter, allow continued development and to facilitate the development of several lines of research, and some believe that this format could contribute to the decrease of the social gap between países5. The National Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine Assisted by Scientific Computing (INCT-MACC) involves 33 national institutions from 11 States, totaling 128 researchers. One of the research areas of INCT-MACC is the processing of medical images, which will allow the acquisition of information to improve the computational modeling of the cardiovascular system in human, also in development by the INCT-MACC. With this purpose was developed a free software and open source called ImageLab. This software would have between features to be friendly with the user needing better assessment. The aim of the study was to develop and evaluate the reliability, agreement, and reproducibility of new software in relation to the other in current use in equipment angiotomografia of coronary. Methods In working together at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ) with the National Laboratory of Scientific Computation (LNCC), it was developed a software for the analysis of DICOM images. This open source free software called ImageLab and has tools created for the analysis and processing of images of angiotomografia of coronary. Out of a population of 6.216 patients who underwent examination of angiotomografia of the coronary between may 2005 and December 2010, we applied the inclusion criteria, ie, patients with complete data recorded in the database created in 2008, and selected 2,895 refer patients. Subsequently after applying the exclusion criteria, the presence of stents in the trunk of the coronary or left Artery Descending Anterior (ADA), clip, surgical, resulting from cabg surgery and patients who did not have images stored in the served, were selected 534 cases (Figure 1). By the website randon.org we performed random selection by removing 120 of 534 patients, and we use the first 100 cases. All patients had their data identifiers are replaced by consecutive numbers, by people who have not participated in the analysis of the images making it blind. We used the raw data of images of angiotomografia of the coronary arteries, obtained by means of a ct scanner available on the service (GE lightspeed VTC 64 and 32, Philips Brilliance 64, 40 and 16). All of the images followed standard protocol for acquisition using similar techniques. All 100 scans were analyzed by two software. The software Philips Brilliance, purchased along with the package cardiovascular (available in Worsktation own analysis of images of the type DICOM). And the software ImageLab developed in this project, installed in the same Worsktation (to neutralize the possible variation of the processing capability of the case to be installed in computers with different capacity). We chose the trunk of the coronary artery and the left ADA for the clinical importance and to enable the analysis, since the use of the 16 segments in their entirety would result in a large number of variables. We follow the nomenclature proposed by the AHA, referring to segments 5, 6, 7, and 86. The evaluation of the presence of lesions coronary larger or smaller than 50% was used for the segment 5 (the trunk of the coronary left) and for the remaining segments (artery descending earlier) we use cuts of 70%. Added shape were also recorded the following variables: the presence of plaques atherosclerotic type calcified, non-calcified and partially calcified (in each segment); subjective quality of images; - time analysis of images (recorded by observer 1). The analysis of the images was made by the visualization of the plans orthogonal from selected image block in a three dimensional space, starting from the analysis in the transverse plane of the thorax towards the head to the feet, in order to view the artery aorta, the origin of the trunk of the coronary artery and the left ADA. The evaluations related to the degree of stenosis follow the pattern of analysis where the failure of the filling next to the vase contrasted defines the presence of injury. The analysis of the type of board responsible for the lesions was carried out in a subjective form. The characterization of the plates was performed according to their morphology and signal intensity, following the scale of the traditional adopted in CT examinations, the scale of Hounsfield (HU)7. The plates were classified as: calcified tissue adjacent to the vessel with the greatest intensity of signal that the vase contrasted - Signal >130 HU); calcified tissue adjacent to the vessel with least signal that the vase contrasted - Signal <-50 HU); and partially calcified (heterogeneous). The two softwares have tool for the location and analysis of any point in three-dimensional space. This tool has been used for the evaluation of the vessels, in their plan axial (view from the inside of the vessels) in their entire length, and when there is the presence of plaques and lesions coronary heart, all the planes are orthogonal, can be used simultaneously, in the topography exact in that these findings are. Analysis of the Images by Two observers with experience of more than five years, equivalent to level 3 competency clínica8, we used commercial software of the Philips and the ImageLab, installed on the same computer, to analyze the segment of the ADA in accordance with the variables described in Table 1. To avoid bias of measurement, the analysis between the software took place with intervals of over 15 days. A total of 600 analyses were performed to assess the concordances intraobservador, interobserver and intersoftware. Statistical analysis descriptive Analysis such as numeric variables, in the form of mean +/- standard deviation. Categorical variables as number (n) and percentages (%). The statistic Kappa to calculate the reproducibility interobserver and intraobservador, all with confidence interval of 95% and concordance simple to measure the cases with a small number of disagreement. The program used was R for Linux. We use the Table 1 to assess the degree of agreement between the concordâncias9. Results After the random selection of 120 cases, 7 cases with numbering less than 100 were excluded because of lack of phase contrast examination (examination of the modality calcium score without the angiotomografia coronary). A total of 100 tests with numbering from 1 to 107 were included for the 600 analyses divided by the observers and the software. (All the results of the concordances obtained using the R program for Linux can be accessed by the link http://cl.ly/3c193E0J1o1M0f360u1d The resulting version of the software ImageLab used in this project proved to be suitable featuring visual and usability convenient (Figure 2). All the 100 patients analyzed conducted the exams between July 2009 and November 2010, the majority of male (65) and with an average age of 58 years (23 to 85). The median body mass index was 27 Kg/m2, classifying the average of the population with overweight (25% classified as obese). Only 15% of the population had no risk factor, and 35% were asymptomatic (Table. 2). The most frequent symptom observed was the presence of pain, atypical for Coronary Artery Disease (cad), and most of the indications of the examinations occurred for the evaluation of some symptom. It is worth noting that 36% of the patients were referred because of the presence of functional testing changed, and 16%, for risk stratification (evaluation of routine with no relation to symptoms or abnormal tests); only 2%, to exclude the diagnosis of disease aterotrombótica as etiology of cardiomyopathy; and 2%, in pre-operative evaluation (the evaluation of surgical risk cardiovascular). The observer 1 has used an electronic device in the format of a clipboard (tablet of the Apple® - Ipad 64 Gb Wifi) to register the scans by the software Bento® for Ipad. This allowed us to register the time of the analyses of the simple form (Table 3). The total time of the analyses performed by observer 1 was approximately 6.8 hours, distributed in 14 days. The average time spent with each analysis was 2 minutes and 4 seconds (21 to 612 seconds). The average time used with the software ImageLab for the analysis of all cases was 226,2 minutes, while with the software Philips Brilliance was 180,9 (20% less). The second analysis for both programs was more rapid, with the decrease of the total time 11.9 minutes, and 10.7 minutes in the software ImageLab and Philips Brilliance, respectively. We recorded the subjective quality of the images by means of a score from 1 to 3; 1 low-quality, 2 intermediate quality, and 3 high quality. Twenty-four percent of images were classified as low quality; 64.2% of the, as intermediate; and 11.8%, as high-quality (76% with intermediate quality or high). To evaluate the concordance intraobservador and interobservadores, we use the concordance (simple sum of the findings consistent due to the total number of cases), in the presence of few or no cases discordant (heterogeneous distribution in the 2 x 2 table with few or no cases in one of the houses), and the statistical Kappa using (Table 1) as a reference of the degree of agreement between the resultados8. The average of the observations of the 600 analyses (Table 3) showed the absence of injury on the trunk of the coronary the left in 82%, and the ADA in 49,3%. Less than 1% with lesions >50% in the trunk of the coronary left and 9% with lesions >70% in some segment of the ADA. The type of card most observed was the calcified. It was possible to perform the agreement analysis through the Kappa, for all comparison types (intraobservador, interobserver and intersoftware), in the variables: the absence of injury and injury <50% of the trunk of the coronary left; absence of injury to the ADA and lesion >70% in the middle third of this artery (Table 4). In the evaluation of the boards, the Kappa can be carried out only with the variable plate, calcified in the trunk of the coronary left (Table 5). The other agreements have been made on the extent of the agreement simple. With the objective of evaluating the concordances intraobservador we compare the analyses carried out by the observer 1 with the software ImageLab at time 1, and ImageLab at time 2, as well as the software Philips Brilliance at time 1, and Philips Brilliance at the time 2 All of the evaluations measured by the Kappa or by the agreement of the simple trunk of the coronary left were more than 60. Only the variable lesion >70% in the middle third of the artery downward, in evaluating interobserver by the software of Philips Brilliance, presented agreement moderate (mop49.7 - 13.8 to to 85.6), all other concordances observed in ADA earlier were more than 609. The assessment of the absence of lesions and lesion <50% in the trunk of the coronary left, as well as the assessment of lesion >70% in the middle third of the ADA demonstrated a greater agreement intraobservador by the software of the Philips Brilliance, the other remained similar. The analysis intersoftware showed agreement above 80 for all the measures carried out by the Kappa, except in the assessment of lesion >70% in the mid-third of ADA (79,6 - 63,6 to 95.7), while all the concordances simple intersoftware were above 80. When analyzed the most frequent observations and with greater clinical significance (Table 6), it was possible to use the Kappa, which demonstrated a higher concordance for the identification of the absence of injury (Kappa greater than 90 in all comparisons), and then the identification of calcified plaques that also showed a degree of agreement is substantial. The agreement decreases in the valuation of significant injuries in ADA (>70%) in the worst Kappa was 47.8 for the evaluation of interobserver with the software ImageLab. Discussion Our work used patients referred by their doctors, by clinical indications varied for the realization of the angiotomografia of coronary. These patients encountered in day-to-day of the particular services referred to this type of examination generally have low probability in the middle of the disease and use the high negative predictive value of exame10 to fend off the diagnosis. We observe that in the studied population, only 9% had chest pain typical for cad, and when we evaluate the result of the calcium scores in the same population (not used in the evaluations), only 20% were with value of above 75 percentile for sex and age, which is related with a higher overall risk of cardiovascular to eventos11. The use of patients referred for indications of the practice of cardiology allows the viability of this project, however, it may pose a problem. The lack of all types of injuries and cards by segments of coronary certainly is a limitation to the analysis of the concordances. In these cases it was only possible to carry out the agreement for the Kappa you need a distribution with the most varied of the findings to be calculated. One of the ways to fix this problem would be the inclusion of patients distributed by injuries and cards, so as to force the input varied from all types of findings. This approach would change the profile of the population to be studied that would certainly be different from the population found on the day-to-day, forwarded by the doctors to clarify a doubt of the diagnosis. The evaluation of only one part of the examination (phase contrast), without the clinical data of the patients, possibly diminishing the capacity of observers in the interpretation of the images. This can interfere with the finding of the examination and perhaps even in the conduct of medical, but our goal was not to assess how much of the new software is accurate in relation to the reference standard (coronary angiography), but to compare it with other widely-used software. We do not find in our review of scientific validation that is specific to the software of Philips, but we believe that the daily use in clinical practice and in scientific papers allows us to conclude that there is some kind of validation for this software. This work was motivated by the line of research funded by Faperj computational modeling of the cardiovascular system. Aims to the future using the ImageLab exams angiotomografia coronary in the format of DICOM, and possibly other exams in this format. The subjective assessment of the degree of injury to, a representative image of the artery that is constantly in motion and is generally less than 3 mm can be difficult. In addition, the display of a complex structure in three-dimensional space is expressed in two-dimensional form for an image is a challenge to the accuracy. The degree of injury estimated with these limitations will define the clinical approach to be taken in a number of cases. Despite the lower accuracy when compared with the cine angiocardiografia (CA), in the angiotomografia of the coronary it is possible to analyze the image in four dimensions (three dimensions plus the time of a cardiac cycle), and this possibly facilitates the agreement with the CA, which is reflected in the high sensitivity and specificity of the angiotomografia coronary with values higher than 90%9. We got a good agreement in most of the reviews and in the direct evaluation between the software. That agreement was greater in assessing intraobservador, which was already expected. Another predictable was greater agreement in cases of absence of injury. The worst ratings occurred among the observers with the software ImageLab in the analysis of lesion >70% in the ADA (Kappa 47.8). This disagreement can be explained, in part, by the difficult to quantify subjective in some cases and the different interpretations of the location of the injury, that is, even when there was a correct evaluation about a particular injury, this information was not recorded correct if it occurs in different segments (lesion > 70% in the ADA in the intercession of the proximal segment and the middle, now interpreted as being in the previous thread, now interpreted as being in the medium segment). Despite the limitation of the population studied described previously, the concordances simple performed in cases with few observations of the injury and the plates were always very good. The lack of that information may harm the external validity of the software to finds more rare, but in the great majority of patients who are referred for this exam does not see these changes. In the analysis of the concordances with greater clinical significance and more frequent observations (Table 6) also observed greater concordance in the observation of the absence of injury in ADA, with Kappa higher than 90. In the same table if you observe a lower correlation for lesion >70%, and in the identification of calcified plaques. These data are in accordance with the characteristics of the angiotomografia of coronary disease, the use of which is most appropriate to rule out the presence of lesions and plaques, that is, the method is more accurate and is more reliable when one does not observe changes to the coronary. When we look in the literature the evaluation of the agreements with CAT, in spite of the use of the reference standard anatomical, there are great variation, with Kappa between 36 to 63 for measures with dichotomous detailed the degree of injury (0, 1 - 50,51 - 69 and >70) and Kappa of 37 to 82 for measures dichotomous less detailed (<70 or >70)12. Another interesting data using two observers is the change of interpretation of a medical report prior to a CAT when compared to a recent evaluation, with agreement moderate, and Kappa ranging between 54 and 60 between the observers. This occurs even when the correlation of recent between these observers is good (Kappa of 69)13. These data can be related to the available information by the observer of the images during the time of the analysis (the images associated with the clinical history, the context of the completion of the examination, examinations prior and symptoms), when compared with the analysis of the images without prior information about the patients. In our study, the absence of information about the patient, including their identification, characteristics of pain, the chest, the result of the examination and functional assessment of the calcium score, can have influenced the interpretation of the images, but our goal was not the release of a report on the clinical, but the comparison between software. Conclusion we Observed concordances very good between the two software, both in the assessment intraobservador as well as in the evaluation of interobserver. The evaluation of the concordances intersoftwares, in the analysis of injuries and cards, in general, was higher than 80. The software ImageLab agree with the software of Philips in the evaluation of tests angiotomografia of coronary disease, has a great potential in the aid of clinical practice and research in this area, despite the need for an assessment more robust. Can be used as a tool within the research line of computational modeling of the cardiovascular system and possibly other areas related to the images in the format DICOM. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Study association This article is part of the master's dissertation of Marcelo Souza Hadlich from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. 