RESUMED OBJECTIVE: To present the findings in CT scans of the chest indicative of extramedullary hematopoiesis in six patients. METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the CT scans of six adult patients - five men and a woman - with average age of 36.5 years. The tests were reviewed by two radiologists independently, and the final decisions were taken by consensus. RESULTS: The most frequent finding in the scans was lower paravertebral masses of heterogeneous content (four patients). CT scans of two patients showed a parietal and pleural solitary mass. CONCLUSIONS: Extramedullary hematopoiesis presents computerized tomography findings strongly suggestive of the diagnosis, which, when correlated with the presence of hematological disease, allows, in most cases, to dispense histopathological evidence. Keywords: X-ray computerized tomography; Extramedullary hematopoiesis, Mediastinum/ pathophysiology, Sickle cell anemia.     Introduction Extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH) is considered a physiological compensatory mechanism, where normal blood cells are formed outside bone marrow, because it is not capable of supplying body's demands. (1-6) It is often associated with congenital hemoglobinopathies or spinal cord replacement acquired disorders.(1.2) While any organ may be involved, liver and spleen are the most common targets.(2,5-8) Thoracic involvement is less frequent and is usually manifested in the form of lower paraspinal bilateral lobulated masses, with soft tissue density.(1,2,4,5) The diagnosis of intra-thoracic EMH can be done through conventional radiography, computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), when the characteristic radiologic findings are present in association with chronic anemia.(9) The differential diagnosis can be reached with analysis of the posterior mediastinal masses. As the needle biopsy should be avoided due to the tissue's high vascularity, these methods become more important for diagnosis. The objective of this study was to present the tomographic findings in six patients with chest EMH.   Methods This study retrospectively analyzed the CT chest of six patients diagnosed with intra-thoracic EMH, from five different institutions located in four Brazilian locations (Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná). The patients were five male and one female. Their age ranged between 19 and 59 years, with an average of 36.5 years. The underlying diseases were sickle cell anemia (three patients), thalassemia (two patients) and spherocytosis (one patient). Of the six patients, five were asymptomatic from respiratory point of view and one presented cough and chest pain. The diagnosis was based on the association of clinical and biochemical profiles (diagnosis of underlying disease) and patterns observed in X-rays and CT. However, three patients with less typical tomographic results underwent through mass biopsies and histopathologic confirmation. CT scans were performed in various tomography scanners, axial 5 to 10 mm thick, 10 mm increments, during deep inspiration, from the apex to the lung bases. Tests were performed using a parenchymal window, with width between 1000 and 1500 Hounsfield units (HU) and center between -500 and -750 HU. Tests were also performed using a mediastinal window, with a width between 300 and 400 HU and a center between 40 and 60 HU. The CT analysis was done by two observers independently and discordant cases were resolved by consensus. The study included the evaluation of the masses as to their location, distribution and density, as well as the presence of other associated changes.   Results Of the six patients, four presented lower paravertebral masses. In three, they were bilateral and relatively symmetric, and one was one-sided, right. As for the content of the masses, in three patients had the presence of adipose tissue, which is in one of those greasy stuff was quite significant. In one patient, the masses were homogeneous, with dense soft parts (Figures 1a and b, 2a and b).         The other two patients showed a parietal pleural mass, both left-sided, with no evidence of paraspinal impairment. In one of these, the mass was homogeneous (Figures 3a and b); on the other, it was associated with bone reaction.     As associated findings, two patients showed calcifications in the spleen (Figure 4). Both had sickle cell anemia. Of the six patients, two had been splenectomized, and for two of them the spleen image was normal. The bone changes related to the underlying disease were identified in three patients.     Discussion The EMH is frequently associated with hemoglobinopathies such as thalassemia, sickle cell anemia and spherocytosis, or myeloproliferative disorders such as leukemia, lymphoma, myelodysplastic syndrome and myelofibrosis.(1,2,8,10,11) EMH is formed by diffuse microscopic areas of hematopoietic tissue, usually found in liver, spleen and lymph nodes.(2,5,6) Other less common sites are the kidneys, pleura, skin, ovaries, bowel, sclera, central nervous system, epidural space and adrenals.(2,11,12) In our study, three patients had sickle cell anemia, thalassemia two and a spherocytosis. The pathogenesis of intra-thoracic EMH includes extrusion of bone marrow stem cells through the thin cortex of the vertebral bodies and ribs for the subperiosteal region, aided by negative pressure. Is the proliferation of these cells not only in the extrusion region, as in other areas in the distance, probably the hematopoietic tissue proliferation of embolization of other areas such as the spleen.(4,11) The Thoracic involvement in EMH is infrequent (1,5); when it occurs, it is usually in the form of rounded masses, lobed, with soft tissue density in the posterior mediastinum, being more common in the lower paraspinal regions.(1,2,4,5,9) Eventually may appear in the anterior mediastinum or pleura.(4) pleural involvement with effusion has been reported.(2,13) of our patients, four presented lower paravertebral masses, and two presented parietal pleural masses. In most cases the presence of the masses does not bring symptoms to the patient. These can arise when there is compression of the cord due to the placement of the epidural space, in the presence of spontaneous hemothorax, secondary or interstitial engagement when the patient may develop fatal acute respiratory failure.(3,4,10,13,14) Among our patients, five were asymptomatic and one presented cough and chest pain. Radiographically, intra-thoracic EMH usually presents in the form of multiple paraspinal mass with soft tissue density, most often bilateral, lobulated, with well-defined borders and without calcifications or associated bone erosions.(1,4,5,9) This is important for the differential diagnosis of paraspinal neurofibromas, which usually have associated bone changes.(4.10) However, evidence of bone lesions related to the underlying disease are common findings. These masses often determine, on chest radiographs, a double aspect cardiac contour, lobed, the incidence in front, as well as a mass aspect lobed projected on the vertebral bodies lower in the lateral view.(13) By TC, masses can be observed with soft tissue density, mostly homogeneous, with characteristics similar to those in conventional radiology, (1,2,5,6) that may or may not be enhanced after administration of contrast medium.(4.10) This imaging method is important to analyze the internal structure of lesions, particularly when high in fat, (5) to assess the presence of other paracostais bone mass and to detect changes associated with certain hematological diseases such as thalassemia and sickle cell anemia.(6) In cases related to thalassemia, sickle cell anemia or myeloid metaplasia, there may be an extension of the medullary cavities of the ribs.(5) All these aspects have been identified in our cases. Interestingly, the findings in two patients showed calcifications in the spleen, resulting from multiple infarcts, with autosplenectomy. Both had sickle cell anemia. This finding may also aid in the differential diagnosis. Active and recent injuries have rich vascularization, while the old and inactive have more fatty tissue and deposition of iron. Between the two extremes, there are various combinations of findings, reflecting the different stages of the hematopoietic focus. The findings on CT and MRI somehow translate these histological differences. Recent and active lesions have soft tissue density on CT and intermediate signal intensity on MRI, both at T1 and T2. After administration of the contrast medium, there is usually some degree of impregnation in active lesions. Old, inactive lesions can show density increase in TC, by impregnation by iron or negative densities, the fatty infiltration. At MRI, these lesions may show high signal intensity on both T1 and T2, because of the fatty infiltration or low signal intensity on both weights, by deposition of iron.(4,8,12) In one study, (6) is followed, tomographic, processing the density of the paravertebral mass in a patient following for 5 years. Initially, the masses showed soft tissue density and subsequently the masses suffered greasy transformation after splenectomy. This transformation was attributed to the resolution of hemolytic disorder and the disappearance of the stimulus that favors the formation of hematopoietic tissue. Another interesting aspect described was diffuse involvement of the lung parenchyma (translated tomographic by ground-glass) and occlusion of small pulmonary vessels. At the necropsy of this patient were found immature hematopoietic elements infiltrating the lung interstitium (finding compatible with EMH surrounding alveolar walls), and hematopoietic cells and aggregates of platelet thrombi occluding the small pulmonary vessels, probably from other viscera such as the spleen.(2) The diagnosis of intrathoracic EMH can be done non-invasively and safely, when the radiological findings are present and are associated with chronic anemia.(5) The needle biopsy should be avoided because Hypervascularization can cause bleeding complications.(4,14) Histopathology usually lies well formed hematopoietic tissue with a normal maturation process of the three cell lines.(14) The differential diagnosis must be made through the posterior mediastinal masses, including neurogenic tumors, lymphoma, paraspinal abscess, extrapleural cysts, lateral meningocele, hyperplasia of the mediastinal lymph nodes and primary and metastatic malignancies.(5,9) The treatment is the underlying disease.(5) The hematopoietic tissue should not be removed, except in the case of spinal cord compression, since it is a compensatory mechanism for the maintenance of red cell formation sufficient to body demand.(4) In more extensive cases, radiation therapy may be indicated.(10,13) Spinal cord compression needs to be addressed urgently. Pleural effusions or hemothorax that persist despite the general drainage respond well to thoracic radiotherapy.(13) In conclusion, the finding of bilateral paravertebral masses well defined in patients with previously diagnosed blood disease should alert for the diagnostic possibility of EMH.   