 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Present the findings in computed tomography of the chest indicative of hematopoese extramedullary approach of six patients. METHODS: we studied, retrospectively, the ct scans of six adult patients-five men and one woman-with an average age of 36.5 years. The scans were analyzed by two radiologists independently, and the final decisions were obtained by consensus. RESULTS: THE finding of more frequent in the ct scans was the mass paravertebral inferior content that is heterogeneous (four patients). The ct scans of two patients showed a mass solitary parietal and pleural. CONCLUSIONS: THE hematopoese extramedullary approach presents aspects in computed tomography strongly suggestive of the diagnosis which, when correlated with the presence of a haematological condition of the base, allow, in most cases, dispense with the proof histopathological. Descriptors: computed Tomography X-ray; Hematopoese extramedullary approach, and Mediastinal disorders/physiopathology, sickle-cell Anemia. Introduction The hematopoese extramedullary approach (HEM) is considered to be a physiological mechanism is concerned, with the formation of normal blood cells outside the bone marrow, which occurs when it is unable to meet the demand of the body. (1-6) Frequently, is associated with hemoglobinopathies congenital or disorders replacement cord purchased. (1,2) Although any organ can be involved, the liver and the spleen are sites of the most common. (2,5-8) The affected chest is less frequent and is usually manifested in the form of masses lobuladas bilateral, paravertebral lower and with density of soft parts. (1,2,4,5) The diagnosis of HEM intrathoracic can be done through conventional radiography, computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), when the radiological findings are characteristic are present in association with a history of chronic anemia. (9) The differential diagnosis is made through the masses of the mediastinum later. As the needle biopsy should be avoided, due to the high vascularity of this tissue, these methods gain greater importance for the diagnosis. The objective of this work was to present the findings of ct observed in six patients with HEM rib cage. Methods in This study were analyzed, retrospectively, the CT of the thorax of six patients with the diagnosis of HEM intrathoracic, coming from five different institutions located in four states (Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Rio Grande do Sul and Paraná). Of these patients, five were male and one female. The age ranged between 19 and 59 years, with a mean of 36.5 years. The diseases of the basis were found sickle cell anemia (three patients), thalassemia (two patients) and esferocitose (a patient). Of the six patients, five were asymptomatic from the point of view breathing and had a cough and chest pain. The diagnosis was based on the association of clinical and laboratory diagnostics (disease-based) and patterns observed in x-rays, and TR. However, three patients with ct less typical performed biopsies of the mass and had the confirmation histopathological. The CT of the thorax were performed on different ct scanner, with axial cuts of 5 to 10 mm of thickness, 10-mm increment, done in deep inspiration, from the apex to the lung bases. The examinations were recorded in a window of parenchyma, with a width between 1000 and 1500 Hounsfield units (UH) and the center between -500 and -750 HU. Were recorded also in the window for the mediastinum, with a width between 300 and 400 UH and centre between 40 and 60 UH. The analysis of TC was done by two observers independently, and the cases that were discordant were resolved by consensus. The study included the evaluation of the masses as to their location, distribution and density, as well as to the presence of other associated changes. Results Of the six patients, four had masses in the paravertebral lower. In three, they were bilateral and relatively symmetric, and in one was unilateral, on the right. As to the content of the masses, in three patients there was the presence of adipose tissue, and in one of these the fatty material was quite significant. In one patient, the masses were homogeneous, with density of soft parts (Figures 1a and b, 2a and b). The other two patients showed a mass in the parietal and pleural, both to the left, without evidence of commitment to paravertebral. In one of these, the mass was homogeneous (Figures 3a and b); on the other, there was the reaction of bone associated with. As findings associated, two patients showed calcifications in the spleen (Figure 4). Both were carriers of sickle cell anemia. Of the six patients, two had been esplenectomizados, and in two the image of the spleen was normal. Bone changes related to the underlying disease were identified in three patients. Discussion THE HEM is often associated with the hemoglobinopathies, such as thalassemia, sickle cell anemia and the esferocitose, or myeloproliferative diseases, such as leukemia, lymphoma, myelodysplasia and mielofibrose. (1,2,8,10,11) THE HEM is formed by areas microscopic diffuse tissue hematopoietic, in general found in the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes. (2,5,6) - Other sites less frequent are the kidneys, pleura, skin, ovaries, bowel, escleras, central nervous system, epidural space and the adrenal. (2,11,12) In our case series, three patients were carriers of sickle cell anemia, two with thalassemia and one of esferocitose. The pathogenesis of HEM intrathoracic includes the extrusion of stem cells in the bone marrow through the cortex thin of the vertebral bodies and ribs, to the region, subperiosteal, aided by the negative pressure. Occurs the proliferation of these cells, not only in the region of the extrusion, as in other areas in the distance, probably by the proliferation of tissue hematopoietic embolizado of other areas, such as the spleen. (4,11) The commitment of the chest to the HEM is infrequent(1,5); when it occurs, is usually in the form of masses of rounded, lobuladas, with density of soft parts in the mediastinum posterior, being more frequent in the regions paravertebral lower. (1,2,4,5,9) may Eventually appear in the mediastinum before or on the pleura. (4) Involvement pleural effusion have already been reported. (2,13) Of our patients, four had masses in the paravertebral lower, and 2 had masses parietal and pleural. Most of the times the presence of the masses does not bring symptoms to the patient. These can arise when there is compression of the cord due to the occupation of the epidural space, in the presence of hemotórax spontaneous, or secondary to involvement of the interstitial, when the patient may develop acute respiratory failure fatal. (3,4,10,13,14) Among our patients, five were asymptomatic and one presented with cough and chest pain. Radiographically, the HEM intrathoracic usually presented in the form of multiple masses in the paravertebral, with density of soft parts, most often bilateral, lobuladas, with well-defined borders and without calcifications or bony erosions associated with. (1,4,5,9) This is important for the differential diagnosis of neurofibromas paravertebral, that, in general, have bone changes associated with it. (4,10) However, evidence of bone lesions related to the disease are findings that are common. These masses usually determine, on radiographs of the chest, an aspect of double contour of the cardiac, lobed, in the incidence on the front, as well as an aspect of mass lobulada projected on the vertebral bodies lower in the incidence in the profile. (13) the TC can be observed at masses with density of soft parts, mostly homogeneous, with characteristics similar to those described in the conventional radiography,(1,2,5,6) that may or may not be highlighted after the administration of contrast medium. (4,10) This method of image it is important to analyze the internal structure of the lesions, particularly when rich in fat,(5) to evaluate the presence of other masses paracostais and to detect changes in bone associated with certain hematologic diseases, such as thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. (6) In cases related to thalassemia, sickle cell anemia or metaplasia myeloid, may be an enlargement of the cavities spinal cord of the ribs. (5) All of these aspects were identified in our cases. It is interesting to note that the findings in two patients showed calcifications in the spleen, arising from infarcts multiple, with autoesplenectomia. Both were carriers of sickle cell anemia. This finding can also help in the differential diagnosis. The lesions active and recent have a rich vascularization, while the old and inactive have more fatty tissue and deposition of iron. Between the two extremes, there are various combinations of findings, reflecting the different stages of evolution of the focus hematopoietic. The findings in the CT scan and on MRI somehow translate these differences in the histological. Lesions recent active and have a density of soft parts in TC and signal strength of the intermediate in the RM, both at T1 and at T2. After administration of contrast medium, usually occurs some degree of impregnation in the lesions active. Injuries old and inactive may show increased density on CT scan, by impregnation by iron, or densities of the negative, by the infiltration greasy. On MRI, these lesions may show high-signal intensity both in T1 and in T2, by the infiltration of fatty, or low signal intensity in both weightings, by the deposition of iron. (4,8,12) In a study,(6) accompanied by, tomograficamente, the transformation of the density of the masses in the paravertebral of a patient in follow-up for 5 years. Initially, the mass had a density of soft parts and, subsequently, the masses suffered a change greasy after splenectomy. This transformation was attributed to the resolution of the disorder hemolytic and the disappearance of the stimulus that favors the formation of tissue hematopoietic. Another interesting aspect described was the involvement diffuse lung parenchyma (translated tomograficamente by infiltrated frosted glass), and occlusion of the small pulmonary vessels. In the autopsy of this patient were found elements of the hematopoietic immature infiltrating the interstitium pulmonary (finding compatible with HEM involving the walls alveolar), in addition to the aggregates of hematopoietic cells and thrombi platelet ocluindo the small pulmonary vessels, probably from other viscera such as the spleen. (2) The diagnosis of HEM intrathoracic can be done non-invasively, safely, when the radiological findings are present and are associated with the chronic anemia. (5) The needle biopsy should be avoided, since the hipervascularização can lead to bleeding complications. (4,14) In histopathology, it is usually tissue hematopoietic, well-formed, with the process of maturation normal of the three cell lines. (14) The differential diagnosis should be done through the masses of the mediastinum later, including tumors neurogênicos, lymphoma, abscess, paravertebral, cysts extrapleurais, meningocele lateral, hyperplasia of the lymph nodes mediastinais and malignant neoplasms, primary and metastatic. (5,9) The treatment is of the underlying disease. (5) The tissue hematopoietic should not be removed, except in case there is spinal cord compression, as it is a compensatory mechanism for the maintenance of a training erythrocyte sufficient to the demand of the body. (4) In cases of more extensive, radiation therapy may be indicated. (10,13) The spinal cord compression needs to be treated with urgency. Pleural effusions or hemotórax that persist in spite of the drainage in general respond well to radiation therapy thoracic. (13) In conclusion, the finding of masses in the paravertebral bilateral well-defined in patients with haematological condition previously diagnosed should alert to the possibility of the diagnostic of HEM. 