ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of death in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF). Non-traditional invasive tests for CAD detection and prediction of events have shown insufficient results in this group. Evaluation of coronary calcium score (BCS) CT has proven prognostic value in people without kidney disease. To evaluate the accuracy of the ECC to detect obstructive CAD and predict cardiovascular events in renal transplant candidates compared to invasive coronary angiography (ICA) quantitative. METHODS: We evaluated 97 patients with CRF and age > 35anos. Was considered the presence of obstructive CAD stenosis > 50% or > 70% by ACI. Descriptive data, concordance, diagnostic tests, Kaplan-Meier and multivariate analysis were used. RESULTS: The mean Agatston score was 580.6 ± 1102.2; the minimum and maximum values ​​are 0 and 7,994, and a median of 176. Only 14 patients had zero calcium score. There were no differences between ethnic groups and the greater presence of regional calcium was associated with a higher probability of coronary stenosis in the same segment. The Agatston calcium score showed good accuracy for diagnosis of stenosis > 50% and > 70% with an area under the ROC curve of 0.75 and 0.70, respectively. On the threshold of 400, the calcium score identified the subgroup with higher rate of cardiovascular events mean follow-up of 29.1 ± 11.0 months. CONCLUSION: The ECC for CAD evaluation showed good diagnostic and prognostic performance for cardiovascular events in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF). Keywords: Computed tomography emission, calcium score, coronary artery disease, chronic renal failure, determination, prognosis.     Introduction Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause of death in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF) 1. The risk of death from CHD in this group of patients is greater than in the general population. Depending on the stage of irc2, cardiovascular risk may increase significantly. In dialysis patients in Stage 5 of CKD, cardiovascular risk is 20 to 1,000 times higher than for the general population without renal disease, depending on the age of the population estudada2. Among patients on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, the prevalence of coronary heart disease is about 40% 1. In the United States, about 10% of dialysis patients die of heart disease each year, with a consensus that CRF patients should be considered at high risk for developing cardiovascular events, and must submit to the cardiovascular assessment frequente3. In the same group, diabetes mellitus poses mortality risk similar to DAC4. Non-invasive tests used for CAD evaluation in CRF patients have the objective to identify the presence of CAD and evaluate the risk of cardiovascular events and óbito5. In CKD patients at high risk for CAD, CAD prevalence and incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) are high. Therefore, to improve the prognosis is necessary the constant demand for CAD, using the best methods available diagnostics. The specialist service in InCor IRC recently identified that significant CAD and cardiovascular complications are not related to most of the classic risk factors in this group of patients with CKD. The authors conclude that patients with diabetes, peripheral arterial disease and previous infarction are at high risk for CAD, MACE or both, and therefore should be referred to invasivo6 diagnostic procedure. Regarding the evaluation strategies of CAD in these patients and its relationship with the prognosis, De Lima et al 7 published conclusive data indicating that the study for the evaluation of CAD with greater prognostic power was invasive coronary angiography (ICA), compared to non-invasive tests (nuclear medicine and stress echocardiography) 7. This opened the way for the investigation of new non-invasive diagnostic methods, which had not yet been evaluated in this group of patients with CKD and had shown good performance in patients with CAD in the general population. These new methods are: cardiovascular magnetic resonance and computed tomography of multiple columns of detectors (MDCT) with assessment of coronary calcification (coronary calcium score - ECC) and detection of coronary stenosis (coronary angiography tomography). One of the most important reasons for the presence of CAD is the use of that information as given prognosis and may thereby have an estimate of individual risk of cardiovascular events and adjust the therapeutic and preventive measures appropriate to the risk of a given patient. While ICA has proven to be a prognostic test poderoso7, new techniques of MDCT have not been tested extensively in patients with pretransplant CRF. Thus, our hypothesis was that the use of MDCT may be useful in the diagnosis of significant CAD and in estimating prognosis in patients with renal transplant candidates IRC. Our objective was to investigate whether coronary calcification detected by MDCT is able to predict the presence of coronary stenosis and cardiovascular events in patients with CRF.   Methods We included 97 patients with CRF on hemodialysis program and referred to undergo kidney transplant, and with clinical indication for ICA. The clinical indication for ICA was based on the fact that patients belong to high-risk group for CAD or through symptoms and / or no previous invasive procedures that could lead to suspected CAD. Patients considered at high risk were those with at least one of the following criteria: 1) age > 50 years; 2) diabetes mellitus; 3) history or clinical evidence of disease cardiovascular8. The recruitment was carried out by specialized clinic in Hypertension Service of the IRC of the Heart Institute of the Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo. In this service, the management of high risk or suspected CAD patients includes ICA for its better performance prognóstica7. MDCT with nonionic iodinated contrast was performed after exclusion of contraindications to the study and informed consent signed. This project was approved by the ethics committee and research InCor and HCFMUSP (CAPEPesq, number 0195/04) and obtained financial support from the Foundation of São Paulo (FAPESP, 2004-08363-6 process). Inclusion criteria were: men or women; 35 years of age or older; CRF; in dialysis and renal transplant candidates; with clinical indication for ICA and maximum range with MDCT a year (held no later than one year before the inclusion or ACI planned for the coming months). Exclusion criteria were known allergy to iodinated contrast media; atrial fibrillation, tachyarrhythmia or advanced atrioventricular block; severe symptomatic heart failure of evidence (NYHA class III / IV); known aortic stenosis; previous cardiac surgery; coronary stent; intolerance or contraindication beta-blockers, such as bronchospastic lung disease. In this study, the CHD was considered significant presence of at least a stenosis > 50% of patients in major coronary branch and luminal diameter greater than 1.5mm, identified by ICA. Secondary analysis also focused stenoses > 70%, as well as segmental analysis in those two thresholds. Of the 97 patients available for study, 63 (65.0%) were male and 34 (35.0%) were female, with mean ± SD age of 56.7 ± 7.4 (Table 1). The minimum age was 35 years and the maximum of 76 years. The prevalence of traditional risk factors for CAD was the following: hypertension - 87 (89.6%); diabetes mellitus - 37 (38.1%); dyslipidemia - 33 (34.0%); arteriopathy 33 (34.0%); Angina - 28 (28.9%); current smoking - 20 (20.6%); family history of CAD - 18 (18.6%); stroke (stroke) - 12 (12.4%); Congestive heart failure (CHF) - 8 (8.2%); acute myocardial infarction (AMI) - 7 (7.2%). It should be noted that patients who had some symptoms or angina were all stable and symptoms were further indication of invasive coronary angiography. There were included patients with coronary angiography indication for investigation of recent onset of chest pain (and potentially unstable). Thus, all patients included in the protocol were asymptomatic at the time of inclusion. Anthropometric data of our sample and heart rate during acquisition of the CT examination are detailed in Table 1. The mean duration of dialysis was 40.2 ± 42.1 months, with a median of 26.5 months, minimum of 2 months and a maximum of 240 months. Protocol for the acquisition of images by MDCT Examinations MDCT were performed in 16 sets and 64-Section (Aquilion16 ™ and Aquilion64 ™ - Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation ™, Otawara, Japan) at the Heart Institute (InCor - HCFMUSP). The patients were instructed to take the details and placed on the table of MDCT in the supine position, shifted to the right, keeping the heart in the center of the focus of X-rays. All patients received electrocardiographic monitoring for synchronization with image acquisition and monitoring heart rate during the test. The patient's arms were positioned above the head and ECG leads off scan field. The heart rate (HR) of patients during the examination was 61.1 ± 6.9 bpm. Patients with heart rate above 70 bpm on arrival at tomography received intravenous beta-blocker metoprolol in dose required to achieve a target heart rate of 60 bpm or until the maximum dose of 15 mg, as they participated in a protocol with the acquisition of CT angiography coronary associated. Heart rate was always measured during respiratory pause. MDCT protocol - image acquisition Initially, we obtained the call localizatória image. A scan window was then visually established according to this first image, with coverage from the bifurcation of the trachea (carina) to the full inclusion of the cardiac silhouette. This design was used for the acquisition of the calcium score. The calcium score was then obtained by prospective acquisition and synchronized to the ECG trace. The images were acquired with thickness 3.0mm cutting and field of view 200-220 mm, to obtain axial images of the chest covering the entire heart area, allowing the visualization of the coronary arteries and eventual calcification in the same topography . Images were acquired in diastolic time set according to the heart rate of the patient. The acquisition of the calcium score required inspiratory pause average of about 15 seconds, according to the protocol already validado9. The calcium score acquisition parameters are: rotation speed of 0.75 s tube collimation of the detectors 4 by 3.0 mm, 120 kV tube voltage, and tube current 300 mA. Acquisition of invasive coronary angiography Coronary angiography was performed according to the techniques already established and standardized in routine hemodynamic service of the Heart Institute (InCor) HC-FMUSP10 and independent clinical indication of the research protocol. Follow-up of cardiovascular events follow-up data were obtained from at least one of three sources: 1) routine visit at specialized outpatient clinic, 2) call for the patient or relative to check on the health of the patient or 3) medical record review of patient. In our protocol, they were considered as cardiovascular events: cardiac death (defined by two cardiologists consensus after review of available data); acute myocardial infarction (enzyme elevation 3x normal value, associated with acute chest pain and / or abnormal ECG compatible with myocardial ischemia); stroke (clinical diagnosis or imaging method); severe peripheral vascular disease or gangrene (severe members of ischemia leading to associated surgical procedure); unstable angina (typical chest pain, ECG changes compatible with myocardial ischemia in patients with intermediate likelihood of CAD at least); Congestive heart failure (clinical diagnosis and echocardiogram showing reduction of LV ejection fraction); and acute pulmonary edema (clinical and chest X-ray showing interstitial pulmonary edema). Data analysis calcium score of the analysis the total calcium scores, according to the method described by Agatston et al 9 were obtained for each patient (Figure 1) workstation Vitrea ™ 2, version 3.5 - Vital Images Inc., Plymouth, MN, USA. In the analysis of calcium score images, we use two measures: the Agatston9 score and the calcium volume. The Agatston score has been the most used in the literature and maintains relationship with coronary heart disease and even with obstructive CAD when at very high levels (percentile above 75% or 90%).     Quantitative coronary angiography or CSF An experienced observer in CSF technique and not involved in the analysis of MDCT also blindly and independently analyzed all ACI applying the technique of CSF (Coronary Analysis Angiographic System - CASS II, Pie Medical Imaging BV ™, Maastricht, The Netherlands) 11-14. Thus, the diameter of each stenosis visually considered at least as intermediate ( > 50%) was objectively designated in percentage values relative to the "reference diameter" (the same vessel diameter which are disease free and located in immediately proximal to the lesion), it is determined in two orthogonal directions, with the average determining the final severity of the stenosis. All lesions with reference diameter > 1.5 mm were included in the comparative analysis of this study. If the same segment of the main artery or first order branch possessed more than one significant stenosis, only the most severe stenosis was compared to its corresponding by TCMD10,15,16. Statistical analysis Descriptive variables were expressed as mean and standard deviation and median, if appropriate. Having presented an asymmetric distribution curve, coronary artery calcification levels were expressed through medians, percentiles and extreme values. In order to establish the diagnostic accuracy of MDCT measurements, we used a classic 2x2 table. The Fisher exact test was used to calculate the measures of diagnostic accuracy of MDCT compared to the CSF, with regard to the identification of coronary stenoses with diameters > 50% and > 70%. To compare the different coronary calcium scores by MDCT in their territory, Mann-Whitney test. Although we used Kaplan-Meier curves for the event rate analysis in time in several subgroups. All analyzes in Stata ™ statistical program / SE 8 (Stata Corp LP, College Station, TX).   Results Our sample of CRF patients Agatston mean score of 580.6 ± 1,102.2. The minimum and maximum values ​​are 0 and 7,994. Of the 97 patients with calcium scores analyzed, only 14 patients had no detectable coronary calcification, that is, zero calcium score. They are also presented in Table 2 the score values ​​and total volume for the entire coronary tree and for each specific coronary territory, with its mean, standard deviation, median, minimum and maximum values ​​in each category. The values ​​of percentiles for age and sex are shown in Table 3. The mean values ​​of percentiles for age, sex and ethnicity, based on the MESA study (Multiethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) are referred to as MESA in Table 3.     The distribution of the ECC is significantly asymmetric, so we report the median of the total score Agatston and their distribution by percentiles (Table 3). Regarding the ethnicity of patients, there was no significant difference in average ECCs between ethnic groups: whites (698.5 ± 1.309, median 205, n = 64); black (389.0 ± 761.80, Mid 158, n = 10); oriental (728.1 ± 1045 272.5 median, n = 8); mulatto or mixed race (217.3 ± 350.0, median 37, n = 22); p = 0.36 for non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test. Calcium score versus coronary stenosis compared the degree of calcification in patients with or without significant obstructive coronary artery disease (stenosis > 70%). Catheterization showed that the Agatston score is significantly higher in patients with significant CAD at catheterization, the Wilcoxon test (Table 2). The time between the completion of MDCT and ICA averaged 99.03 days with a standard deviation of 87.65 days and a median of 79 days. The minimum interval was 2 days and a maximum of 380 days, with only 2 cases over one year and 16 cases with range more than six months. We evaluated the percentage of patients with coronary stenosis > 50% and > 70% by ICA in the various ECC extracts. We observed a progressive, linear and significant increase between the percentage of patients with CAD and the degree of coronary calcification (Figure 2). Patients with ACI stenosis > 50% were 55/97 (57%) and patients with stenosis of > 70% were 25/97 (26%).     In the analysis of coronary calcification versus the ICA, we observed that for stenoses > 50% and > 70%, the threshold of 400 Agatston score was statistically associated with a higher proportion of patients with significant stenosis (p < 0.001, chi-square, figure 2). The regional analysis of the calcium score also revealed the same differences observed for the overall score, except TCE. Thus, the regional scores were significantly higher in segments with stenosis > 50% and 70% when compared to segments with no strictures. The accuracy of calcium score in coronary stenosis diagnosis was also evaluated using the MESA study percentile percentile threshold 75, and is shown in Table 4. Of the 14 patients with zero calcium score: four (28%) had stenosis > 50% in ICA and only two (14%) stenosis > 70%. Using the calcium score in binary form, equal to zero or greater than zero, for predicting coronary stenosis, we obtained in our sample a negative predictive value of 71% for stenosis > 50% and 86% for stenosis > 70%. calcium score - predictive value of coronary stenosis investigated using logistic regression and building ROC curves (receiver-operating characteristics), the calcium score can predict the presence of coronary stenosis on ICA. We evaluated the accuracy of calcium score by ROC curve analysis for both the 50% stenosis threshold (area under the curve of 0.75) and 70% (area under the curve of 0.70), defined by ACI ( figure 3, panel a for the 50% threshold and the threshold B to 70%). Based on logistic regression and the ROC above, we can state that calcium score can predict the presence of coronary stenosis > 50% by ACI, the best threshold to 186.53, with an accuracy of 66%, sensitivity 65%, specificity 66%, positive predictive value 72%, and negative predictive value 60% (p = 0.01). Likewise, calcium score can predict the presence of coronary stenosis > 70% by ACI, the best threshold to 1330.72, with an accuracy of 65%, sensitivity 64%, specificity 65%, positive predictive value 39% and negative predictive value 84% (p = 0.01). The thresholds were also those with the best possible negative predictive values, therefore answering the question of the calcium score level can foresee no significant stenosis. Calcium score versus cardiovascular events The mean follow-up for evaluation of events in our population was 29.1 ± 11.0 months, with a median of 31 months and minimum follow-up of 3 months and a maximum of 43 months. The observed events and their absolute frequencies were: acute myocardial infarction (eight), stroke (five), severe peripheral vascular disease or gangrene (four), unstable angina (two), sudden death (two), congestive heart failure ( one) and acute pulmonary edema (one). The total number of events was 23. Of the 97 patients, 23 cases presented events, totaling 23.7% of our sample. No events were reported and 71 patients were lost to follow-up in three cases. Regarding the prediction of events that the ECC could have in this population, we observed that the study of MESA percentile of this population was not significantly predictive of events in both the 75% threshold to the 90% threshold. Even in the event of analysis, we tested the calcium score as a predictor of events in various cutting thresholds: 0 (presence or absence), 10, 100 and 400. The calcium score threshold 400 shows Kaplan-Meier curves with a significantly different rate of events, shown in Figure 4.     Discussion This is the first study to show that MDCT does provide prognostic information in patients with CRF, renal transplant candidates. The ECC was correlated with the presence of stenosis and good diagnostic performance in relation to the ICA in detecting stenosis, and showed prognostic power to the cutoff level of 400 Agatston score in our population. They observed very high average scores. Scores above 300 or 400 are reported in the literature for non-CRF patients as associated to a high probability of obstructive CAD and high risk events cardiovasculares17,18. In patients with dialysis CKD, a magnitude 2.5 times higher calcification coronariana19-22, although this increased calcification has been related more to the traditional risk factors for CAD increased in this population, than factors related to renal function it is reported or the diálise23. Vascular calcification is described as related to dialysis, called uremic arteriopathy characterized by diffuse calcification of the middle layer of small arteries and arterioles average diameter with thrombosis and intimal proliferation, which can cause ulcers and skin necrosis. How this mechanism may influence coronary artery calcification in this group of patients is not completely esclarecido24. Although it has been observed in patients from the general population only partial correlation between calcification and obstruction coronária18, correlation and good diagnostic accuracy between calcium score and coronary stenosis by MDCT and ICA in patients with CRF. The 75% percentile of the MESA study showed 82% sensitivity and 84% for the detection of CAD with obstructive lesion > 50% and 70%, respectively. This result seems extremely encouraging the use of this simple technique with low radiation and no use of contrast. These sensitivity levels are usually not affected, even for pharmacological stress tests, such as scintigraphy and echocardiogram. In a study of our group using a cardiac MRI dipyridamole stress test and scintigraphy, we obtained sensitivity of 84% and 66%, respectively, in this group of patients25. However, both MRI and other stress tests are more complex tests, time-consuming, costly and greater risk to the patient that the calcium score. The use of absolute calcium score yielded lower sensitivity values ​​than that reached by the 75% percentile. Thus, we conclude that the use of the 75% percentile of the MESA study was more accurate for the detection of CAD that calcium score in absolute numbers. The best accuracy of the absolute calcium score for stenosis detection > 50% in ICA was 186. These threshold values have reported the best possible negative predictive value in this sample, and thus, our data indicate that calcium score < 186 or below the 75% percentile may rule out significant coronary stenosis with close to 90% in this group of patients. Thus, the usefulness of calcium score seems to be even more significant in patients with CRF. This correlation held true for both the global and regional Agatston score. We can also remember that, in patients with a high degree of calcification, CT angiography of coronary heart may be limited in the evaluation of luminal reduction, although special techniques and experienced observers may turn such review clinicamente26. Literature data have shown calcium score much like predictor of cardiovascular events than coronary stenosis in patients population general17. The MESA study has recently confirmed this fact in several etnias27, reinforcing the prognostic role of calcium score. In our study, the correlation of calcium with events in patients with CRF was significant to the level of 400 Agatston score, suggesting that it can be used as a predictive prognostic threshold. Thus, our data suggest that in patients with CRF, calcium score has predictive value not only to events as well as for the detection of coronary stenosis, unlike the general population. In this respect, a limitation of this study was the presence of seven patients with previous myocardial infarction, which may have increased the diagnostic power of the test in this population. However, in sensitivity analysis excluding these patients, there was no significant change in the diagnostic performance of calcium score in our group. On the other hand, our study used an advanced methodology, recently described for segmentation of the coronary tree and analysis estatística28, which represents an evolution in the scientific method in this field and has been used by us in a multicenter study of great impacto29. Some important clinical use of implications can be derived from our results in combination with data from the literature and from our group. Given the high ACI index in which the result is the absence of CAD or nonobstructive CAD (approximately 40%) 30, associated with the characteristics of excellent calcium score of the safety profile, its low cost and good sensitivity shown by our results in patients with CRF, it is suggested that this may be an instrument with a cost-effectiveness in detection of CAD. The evaluation of cost-effectiveness was not the objective of this work, and this data needs to be investigated in future work, directly facing this analysis.   Conclusion We can state that calcium score by computed tomography showed good diagnostic capacity for predicting coronary stenosis (75th percentile or 186 in absolute value), and prognosis in predicting cardiovascular events (in absolute value of 400) in patients with renal impairment. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study was funded by FAPESP and Zerbini Foundation. Study Association This article is part of the doctoral thesis of Abraham Miguel Rosario at the Heart Institute (InCor) of the Hospital das Clinicas, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo.   