 SUMMARY background: coronary artery disease (cad) is the leading cause of death in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF). The non-invasive tests traditional for the detection of cad and prediction of events have shown insufficient results in this group. The evaluation of the coronary artery calcium score (ECC) computed tomography has proven prognostic value in the population without renal disease. OBJECTIVE: to Evaluate the accuracy of the ECC to detect the DAC obstructive and predict cardiovascular events in candidates to renal transplantation compared to coronary angiography invasive (ACI) quantitative. METHODS: we evaluated 97 patients with CRF and age > 35anos. It was considered to be DAC obstructive the presence of stenosis >50% or >70% by ACI. Descriptive data, correlation, diagnostic tests, Kaplan-Meier and multivariate analysis were used. RESULTS: THE score of Agatston medium was 580,6 ± 1.102,2; the minimum and maximum values were 0 and 7.994, and a median of 176. Only 14 patients had a calcium score of zero. There were no differences between the ethnic groups and the increased presence of calcium regional, with a greater likelihood of stenosis of the coronary artery in the same segment. The calcium score of Agatston presented good accuracy for the diagnosis of stenosis, >50% and >70% with area under the ROC curve of 0.75 and 0.70, respectively. On the threshold of 400, the calcium score identified the subgroup with the highest rate of cardiovascular events in a median follow-up 29.1±11,0 months. CONCLUSION: THE ECC in the evaluation of the DAC to put in a good performance, diagnostic, and prognostic for cardiovascular events in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF). Key words: computed Tomography emission, calcium score, artery disease coronary, chronic renal failure, determination, prognosis. Introduction coronary artery disease (cad) is the leading cause of death in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF)1. The risk of death by DAC in this group of patients is greater than in the general population. Depending on the stage of IRC2, the cardiovascular risk may increase significantly. In dialysis patients, in stage 5 of the IRC, the cardiovascular risk is 20 to 1,000 times greater than in persons of the general population without renal disease depending on the age of the population estudada2. Among patients on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis, the prevalence of coronary heart disease is around 40%1. In the United States, about 10% of dialysis patients die of heart disease each year, with a consensus that patients with CRF should be considered at high risk for the development of cardiovascular events, and shall submit to the evaluation cardiovascular frequente3. Even in this group, the diabetes mellitus imposes a risk of mortality similar to the DAC4. Non-invasive tests, used in the assessment of chd in patients with IRC, have as objectives to identify the presence of cad and to assess the risk of cardiovascular events and óbito5. In patients with CRF and high risk for cad, the prevalence of cad and the incidence of adverse events cardiovascular larger (EACM) are high. Therefore, to improve the prognosis it is necessary the constant search for the DAC, through the best diagnostic methods available. The service specialises in IRC InCor recently identified that DAC's significant and cardiovascular complications are not related to most classical risk factors in this specific group of patients with IRC. The authors conclude that patients with diabetes, peripheral arterial disease, and previous infarction are at high risk for cad, EACM, or both, and, therefore, should be referred for diagnostic procedure invasivo6. With regard to strategies of evaluation of cad in these patients and its relation with the prognosis Of Lima and cols.7 have published conclusive data indicating that the study for the evaluation of the DAC with the highest prognostic power was the coronary angiography invasive (ACI), when compared to the non-invasive tests (nuclear medicine and stress echocardiography)7. This opened up the possibility for the investigation of new methods of diagnostics, non-invasive, that had not yet been evaluated in this group of patients with IRC and came to demonstrating good performance in patients with cad in the general population. Among these new methods are magnetic resonance imaging and cardiovascular computed tomography of multiple columns of detectors (MDCT), with assessment of calcification of the coronary (coronary artery calcium score - ECC) and the detection of the stenosis of coronary (coronary angiography by ct scan). One of the most important reasons to assess the presence of DAC is the use of this information as given the prognosis, and can therefore have an estimate of the individual risk of cardiovascular events and adjust the therapeutic measures and preventive manner appropriate to the risk of a given patient. While the ACI has been shown to be an examination prognosis poderoso7, the new techniques of MDCT has not yet been tested widely in patients with CRF pre-transplant. Thus, our hypothesis was that the use of the MDCT can be useful in the diagnosis of DAC-significant and in the estimation prognostic in patients with CRF candidates for renal transplantation. Our aim was to investigate whether the calcification coronary artery detected by MDCT is able to predict the presence of stenosis in coronary and cardiovascular events in patients with CRF. Methods we included 97 patients with CRF on hemodialysis, indicated to be submitted to renal transplant and with clinical indication of ACI. The clinical indication for ACI was based on the fact the patients belong to the group of high risk for cad or by means of symptoms and/or non-invasive tests prior to take the suspicion of the DAC. The patients considered as high risk were those with at least one of the following criteria: 1) age >50 years; 2) diabetes mellitus; 3) history or clinical evidence of disease cardiovascular8. The recruitment was carried out by the specialized outpatient IRC Service Hypertension the Heart Institute of the Faculty of Medicine of the University of São Paulo. In this service, the management of high-risk patients or suspected DAC includes the ACI due to its better performance prognóstica7. MDCT with contrast iodinated non-ionic was performed after exclusion of contraindications to the study and free and informed consent signed. This project was approved by the ethics committee and research of the InCor and HCFMUSP (CAPEPesq, number 0195/04) and obtained financial support from the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP, process number 2004-08363-6). The inclusion criteria were: men or women; with over 35 years of age or older; with IRC; dialysis program and candidates for renal transplantation; clinical indication of ACI and maximum interval with the MDCT of a year (held at the maximum until one year prior to inclusion or with ACI planned for the next few months). The exclusion criteria were: known allergy to contrast medium iodinated; atrial fibrillation, taquiarritmia or atrioventricular block advanced; evidence of heart failure symptomatic severe (NYHA class III/IV); aortic stenosis known; cardiac surgery prior; coronary stent; intolerance or contraindication to beta-blocker known, as pulmonary disease broncoespástica. In this study, was considered to be DAC-significant in the presence of at least one stenosis >50% per patient, in the branch of the coronary artery the main and diameter luminal greater than 1.5 mm, identified by the ACI. Were also analyzed secondarily stenosis >70%, as well as the analysis target in these two thresholds. Of the 97 patients available for the study, 63 (65.0 per cent) were male and 34 (or 35.0%) female, with a mean age ± standard deviation 56.7±7,4 (table 1). The minimum age was 35 years and the maximum 76 years. The prevalence of the traditional risk factors for cad was the following: systemic arterial hypertension - 87 (89,6%); diabetes mellitus - 37 (or 38.1%); dyslipidemia - 33 (34,0%); artery disease 33 (34,0%); angina - 28 (28,9%); tobacco use current - 20 (20,6%); family history of DAC - 18 (18,6%); cerebrovascular accident (STROKE) - 12 (12,4%); congestive heart failure (chf) - 8 (8,2%); acute myocardial infarction (IAM) - 7 (7,2%). It is important to emphasize that patients who had some symptoms or angina were all stable and the symptoms were later in the indication of coronary angiography is invasive. Were not included patients with indication for coronary angiography for investigation of chest pain of recent onset (and potentially unstable). Thus, all patients included in the protocol were asymptomatic at the time of inclusion. The anthropometric data of our sample and the heart rate during the acquisition of the ct examination are detailed in table 1. The average time of dialysis was 40,2±42,1 months, with a median of 26.5 months, minimum 2 months and maximum of 240 months. Protocol of acquisition of the images by MDCT examination MDCT were performed in the apparatus 16 and 64 columns of detectors (Aquilion16™ and Aquilion64™ - Toshiba™ Medical Systems Corporation, Otawara, Japan) at Heart Institute (InCor - HCFMUSP). The patients were oriented as to the details of the examination and placed on the table of the MDCT in a position of supine, shifted to the right, keeping the heart in the center of the focus of X-rays. All patients received monitoring electrocardiographic synchronization with the image acquisition and tracking of the heart rate during the examination. The patient's arms were positioned above the head and with the cables from the ECG stepping outside the scanning field. The heart rate (HR) of the patients during the examination was 61.1 ± 6,9 bpm. Patients with heart rate above 70bpm on arrival to the ct received a beta-blocker, intravenous metoprolol at a dose required to achieve the FC target of 60 bpm or up to the maximum dose of 15 mg, as they participated in a protocol with acquisition of angiotomografia of coronary heart associated. The heart rates were always measured during breath-hold. Protocol of MDCT acquisition of the images Initially, obtínhamos the call image localizatória. A window raster was then visually established based on this first image, with coverage from the bifurcation of the trachea (carina) up to the full inclusion of the silhouette of the heart. This planning was used for the acquisition of the calcium score. The calcium score was then obtained through the acquisition of prospective and synchronized to the ECG trace. The images were acquired with a section thickness of 3.0 mm, and field of view of 200 to 220 mm, for obtaining images thrust of the thorax covering the whole of the cardiac area, allowing the visualization of the coronary arteries and eventual calcification of the topography of the same. The images were acquired at the time the diastolic is defined according to the heart rate of the patient. The acquisition of the calcium score required inspiratory pause average of about 15 s, according to the protocol already validado9. The acquisition parameters of the calcium score were: speed of rotation of the tube of 0.75 s, collimation of the detectors 4 for 3.0 mm, a tube voltage of 120 kV, and tube current of 300 mA. Acquisition of ct coronary angiography invasive The angiography the coronary arteries were performed according to the techniques already established and standardized in the routine of the service of hemodynamics of the Heart Institute (InCor) HC-FMUSP10 and with clinical indication independent of the research protocol. Follow-up of cardiovascular events The tracking data were obtained from at least one of three sources: 1) routine consultation at the outpatient clinic specialized, 2) phone call to the patient or family asking about the health status of the patient, or 3) the review of the medical records of the patient. In our protocol, were considered as cardiovascular events: cardiac death (defined by two cardiologists in consensus after review of the available data); and acute myocardial infarction (elevation of enzymes 3x the normal value, associated with acute chest pain and/or alteration of the ECG compatible with myocardial ischemia); stroke (clinical diagnosis or by image method); vascular disease, severe peripheral or gangrene (ischemia of the limbs severe that led to the surgical procedure associated); unstable angina (chest pain typical change of ECG compatible with myocardial ischemia in patients with probability at least intermediate CAD); congestive heart failure (clinical diagnosis and echocardiogram indicating a reduction of the ejection fraction of the VE); and acute pulmonary edema (clinical diagnosis and chest radiography showing pulmonary edema and interstitial). Data analysis Analysis of the calcium score calcium Scores total, according to the method described by Agatston and colleagues.9, were obtained for each patient (figure 1) on workstation Vitrea™2, version-3,5 - Vital Images Inc, Plymouth, MN, USA. In the analysis of the images of the calcium score, we use two measures: the score of Agatston9 and the volume of calcium. The score of Agatston has been the most used in the literature and maintains the relationship with coronary artery disease and even with DAC obstructive when in very high levels (percentile above 75% or 90%). Coronary angiography quantitative or CSF An observer experienced in the technique of CSF and who did not participate in the analysis of MDCT, also blind and independent, reviewed all of the ACI by applying the technique of CSF (Coronary Analysis Angiographic System - CASS II, Pie Medical Imaging BV ™, Maastricht, The Netherlands)11-14. Thus, the diameter of each stenosis visually, considered as at least intermediate (> 50%) was objectively designated values, percentages relating to the so-called "diameter of reference" (diameter of the segment of the same vessel that was disease free and was located in a position immediately proximal to the lesion), being determined in the two directions are orthogonal, with the average between them to establish the final gravity of the stenosis. All lesions with diameter > 1.5 mm were included in the comparative analysis of this study. If the same segment of the main artery or a branch of the first order to have more of a stenosis significant, only the stenosis more severe it was compared to its corresponding TCMD10,15,16. Statistical analysis The descriptive variables were expressed as averages and one standard deviation, and median, if appropriate. For having presented a distribution curve asymmetric, the levels of coronary artery calcification were expressed by their medians, percentiles and extreme values. In order to establish the measures of diagnostic accuracy of MDCT, we launched the hand of a classical table 2x2. The Fisher's exact test was used to calculate measures of diagnostic accuracy of MDCT, compared to the CSF, with regard to the identification of stenosis coronary artery with diameters > 50% and > 70%. For the comparison of the different coronary artery calcium scores obtained by the MDCT in the respective territories, we use the Mann-Whitney test. Were still used Kaplan-Meier curves for the analysis of rate of events in time in different subgroups. All the analyses carried out in the statistical program Stata™/SE 8 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). Results our sample of patients with IRC presented the score of Agatston average 580,6 ± 1.102,2. The minimum and maximum values were 0 and 7.994. Of the 97 patients with calcium score was analyzed, only 14 patients had no calcification, coronary detectable, that is, the calcium score of zero. They are presented also in table 2 the values of score and the total volume for the entire tree crown, and to each territory and coronary artery-specific, with their averages, standard deviations, median, minimum and maximum values in each category. The values of the percentiles for age and sex are presented in table 3. The average values of the percentiles for age, sex and ethnicity, based on the MESA study (Multiethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) are referred to as the TABLE, in the table 3. The distribution of the ECC is significantly asymmetric, therefore, we report the median of the total score of Agatston and their distribution by percentiles (table 3). With respect to the ethnicity of the patients, there was no significant difference of ECCs medium between the ethnic groups: white (698,5±1.309, median, 205, n=64); black (389,0±761,80, median, 158, n=10); oriental (728,1±1045, median 272,5, n=8); mixed race or mestizos (217,3±350,0, median 37, n=22); p = 0.36 by the non-parametric test of Kruskal-Wallis. Calcium score versus stenosis coronary we Compared the degree of calcification between the patients with or without coronary artery disease obstructive significant (stenosis >70%). By catheterization showed that the score of Agatston is significantly higher in the group with cad significant in catheterization, by the Wilcoxon test (table 2). The time elapsed between the implementation of MDCT and ICA was in the middle of 99,03 days with a standard deviation of 87,65 days and a median of 79 days. The minimum interval was 2 days and a maximum of 380 days, with only 2 cases over a year, and 16 cases with an interval of more than six months. We evaluate the percentage of patients with stenosis of the coronary artery > 50% and > 70% by ICA in the various extracts of ECC. We observe a progressive growth, linear, and significant between the percentage of patients with cad and the degree of calcification of the coronary artery (figure 2). Patients with stenosis by ICA >50% were 55/97 (57%), and patients with stenosis >70% were 25/97(26%). In the analysis of calcification in coronary versus the ACI, we observe that for stenosis > 50% and > 70%, the threshold of 400 score of Agatston associated with a statistically greater proportion of patients with stenosis, significant (p < 0.001, by chi-square test, figure 2). The regional analysis of the calcium score also showed the same differences observed for the overall score, except in the TEC. Thus, the scores of regional were significantly higher in segments with stenosis > 50% and 70% when compared with those segments without stenosis. The accuracy of the calcium score to diagnose the stenosis of coronary artery was also evaluated by the use of the percentile of the DESK study on the threshold of the 75th percentile, and is shown in table 4. Of the 14 patients with score and calcium zero: four (28%) had stenosis >50% in ACI and only two (14%) stenosis > 70%. Using the calcium score in binary form, equal to zero or greater than zero, to predict the stenosis of coronary artery, obtained in our sample a negative predictive value of 71% for stenosis >50% and 86% for stenosis >70%. Calcium score - the predictive capacity of the stenosis, coronary Investigated, using logistic regression and by constructing ROC curves (receiver-operating characteristics), if the calcium score can predict the presence of stenosis of coronary artery in the ACI. We evaluate the accuracy of the calcium score for the analysis of the ROC curve for both the threshold of stenosis of 50% (area under the curve of 0.75) as 70% (area under the curve 0.70), defined by the ACI (figure 3, panel A for the threshold of 50% and B for the threshold of 70%). Based on logistic regression and ROC curves above, we can state that the calcium score can predict the presence of a stenosis coronary >50% by ACI, in the best threshold 186,53, with an accuracy of 66%, sensitivity 65%, specificity 66%, positive predictive value 72%, and negative predictive value 60% (p=0.01). In the same way, the calcium score can predict the presence of a stenosis coronary >70% by ACI, in the best threshold 1.330,72, with an accuracy of 65%, sensitivity 64%, specificity 65%, positive predictive value 39%, and negative predictive value 84% (p=0.01). The thresholds above were also those that presented the best predictive values of negative potential, and being able to answer the question of what level of calcium score can predict the absence of stenosis significant. Calcium score versus cardiovascular events The median follow-up for evaluation of events in our population was 29.1±11,0 months, with a median of 31 months, and follow-up to a minimum of 3 months and maximum of 43 months. The events observed and their frequencies absolute were: acute myocardial infarction (eight), stroke (five), peripheral vascular disease, severe or grangrena (four), unstable angina (two), sudden death (two), congestive heart failure (a) and acute pulmonary edema (one). The total number of events was 23. Of the 97 patients, 23 cases showed events, amounting to 23,7% of our sample. Not presented events 71 patients and there was a loss of follow-up in three cases. With respect to the prediction of events that the ECC could have in this population, we observed that the percentile of the DESK study of this population was not predictive significantly of events, both in the 75% threshold as in threshold of 90%. The analysis of events, we tested the calcium score as a predictor of events at various thresholds of cut: 0 (presence or absence), 10, 100, and 400. The threshold calcium score of 400 showed Kaplan-Meier curves with the rate of events is significantly different, as shown in figure 4. Discussion This was the first work to demonstrate that MDCT provides information that is prognostic in patients with IRC, candidates for renal transplantation. The ECC showed correlation with the presence of stenosis and good performance of the diagnostic with respect to the ACI for the detection of stenosis, and showed prognostic power to the cut-off level of 400 score, Agatston in our population. Have you observed if the mean scores are very high. Scores above 300 or 400, are reported in the literature in patients without IRC as being associated with the high likelihood of DAC obstructive and high-risk events cardiovasculares17,18. In patients with IRC dialítica, is reported a magnitude 2.5 times higher than calcification coronariana19-22, though such calcification is increased has been related more to the traditional risk factors for cad increased in this population, the factors related to renal function or to the diálise23. It is described a calcification of the vascular-related to dialysis, called artery disease urêmica, characterized by calcification diffuse to the middle layer of arteries of small-to medium-diameter and arterioles, with intimal proliferation and thrombosis, which can cause ulcers and necrosis of the skin. How this mechanism can influence the calcification of the coronary arteries in this group of patients is not completely esclarecido24. Although it has been observed in patients from the general population, a correlation only partial between the calcification and obstruction coronária18, there was a correlation and accuracy of diagnostic good between the calcium score and stenosis of coronary artery by MDCT and by ICA in the group of patients with IRC. The percentile of 75% of the MESA study showed sensitivity of 82% and 84% for the detection of DAC with obstructing lesion > 50% and 70%, respectively. This result seems to us extremely encouraging of the use of this simple technique, with low radiation and without the use of contrast. These sensitivity levels are not usually reached, not even by examination with a pharmacological stress, such as scintigraphy and echocardiography. In a study from our group, using magnetic resonance imaging cardiovascular with stress with dipyridamole and the scintigraphy, we obtained sensitivity of 84% and 66%, respectively, in this group of pacientes25. Nevertheless, both the resonance as the other methods of stress are exams to more complex, time consuming, costly, and greater risk to the patient than the calcium score. The use of the calcium score absolute yielded sensitivity values lower than the one reached by the percentile 75%. Thus, we conclude that the use of the percentile 75% of the DESK study was more accurate for the detection of the IPC in that the calcium score in absolute number. The best accuracy of the calcium score absolute for the detection of stenosis >50% in ICA was 186. These threshold values had the best predictive value negative possible in this sample, and thus, our data indicate that a calcium score <186 or below the 75 percentile% can take away the suspicion of stenosis of the coronary significant with a probability close to 90% in this group of patients. Thus, the usefulness of the calcium score appears to be even more significant in the group of patients with IRC. This correlation proved to be true both for the score of Agatston global and regional levels. We can still remember that, in patients with a high degree of calcification, the angiotomografia of the coronary may be limited in the evaluation of the reduction in luminal, although special techniques and expert observers could make this assessment useful clinicamente26. The data from the literature have indicated that the calcium score a lot more as a predictor of cardiovascular events than the stenosis of coronary artery in patients of the population public17. The MESA study recently confirmed this data in the various etnias27, strengthening the role prognosis of the calcium score. In our study, the correlation of calcium with events in the patients with CRF showed a significant to the level of 400 score of Agatston, suggesting that this can be used as a threshold for predicting prognostic. Thus, our data suggest that, in the group of patients with IRC, the calcium score has a predictive value not only for events but also for the detection of stenosis in coronary, differently from the general population. In this regard, a limitation of this study was the presence of seven patients with myocardial infarction prior, which may have elevated the power of the diagnostic test in this population. However, in sensitivity analysis, excluding these patients, there was no significant change in the performance of the diagnostic use of calcium score in our group. On the other hand, our study used an advanced methodology, recently described for the segmentation of tree coronary and analysis estatística28, which represents an evolution in scientific method in this field and has been used by us in multi-center study of large impacto29. Some important implications of the clinical use can be derived from our results in combination with data from literature and our group. In view of the high incidence of ACI in which the result is the absence of a DAC or DAC non-obstructive (approximately 40%)30, associated to the characteristics of the excellent safety profile of the calcium score, its low cost and good sensitivity demonstrated by our results in patients with IRC, it is suggested that this may be an instrument with a good relationship cost-effectiveness in the detection of CAD. The evaluation of the cost-effectiveness was not the goal of this work, that this needs to be investigated by future work, directly focused for this analysis. Conclusion we Can say that the calcium score by computed tomography presented good diagnostic capacity to predict stenosis, coronary (75 percentile or 186 in absolute value), and prognostic in the prediction of cardiovascular events (in the absolute value of 400) in patients with renal insufficiency. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study was funded by FAPESP and Fundação Zerbini. Study association This article is part of the doctoral thesis of Miguel Abraham Rosary by the Heart Institute (Incor) of Hospital das Clínicas, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo. 