ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: GRACE and TIMI's accuracy scores to predict the extent of coronary artery disease in patients with acute coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation (ACS) is not established. To test the hypothesis of the risk scores, GRACE and TIMI satisfactorily predict the extent of coronary artery disease in patients with SCA undergoing coronary angiography. METHODS: Individuals admitted to objective criteria of SCA who underwent coronary angiography during hospitalization were consecutively analyzed. The angiographic coronary disease was described in three ways: quantification of the extent of coronary artery disease by the Gensini's score; presence of any coronary obstruction (> 70% or > 50% when the left main coronary artery); presence of severe disease (three-vessel or left main coronary artery). RESULTS: In 112 patients evaluated, there was a positive correlation of Gensini's score with GRACE's scores (p = 0.017) and TIMI (p = 0.02), but this association was of a weak magnitude (r = 0.23 and r = 0.27, respectively). The GRACE score was not able to predict obstructive coronary artery disease (area under the ROC curve = 0.57; 95% CI = 0.46 to 0.69), or severe coronary artery disease (ROC = 0.59; 95% CI = 0.48 -0.70). The TIMI score showed a modest predictor for the presence of coronary artery disease (ROC = 0.65; 95% CI = 0.55 to 0.76) and the presence of severe disease (ROC = 0.66; 95% CI = 0, 56-.76). CONCLUSION: (1) There is a positive association between the value of TIMI or GRACE scores and extent of coronary disease in patients with SCA; (2) However, the degree of this association is not enough so that these scores become predictors of the coronary angiography accurate results. Keywords: acute coronary syndrome/complications; scoring propensity; coronary angiography/use; coronary vessels/anatomy & histology.     Introduction Individuals hospitalized for acute coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation (ACS) have wide spectrum of severity, which varies according to clinical and laboratory characteristics. Thus, the risk stratification is essential for proper clinical decision discriminating individuals who benefit from more aggressive strategies. It has been shown that the use of multivariate models in the form of scores represent the most accurate means for predicting risk, higher than the subjectively obtained by clinical impression2. The TIMI and GRACE scores are the most used and have prognostic value established by prospectiva 1,3 cohort studies. Besides the prognostic assessment, the prediction of the anatomical extent of the coronary artery disease is potentially useful for clinical decision. This is because the prediction of obstructive disease (or severely obstructive) is another criteria in favor of the coronary angiography, because this finding anticipates the need for myocardial revascularization. In this regard, some studies have shown an association between the value of the TIMI score and the number of arteries affected by obstructive disease. In turn, none of these studies is a discriminatory accuracy analysis, leaving open the diagnostic value of this score as the presence and severity of the coronary disease 4-7. As for the GRACE score, there are no studies that explore its association with coronary anatomy. In order to test the hypothesis that TIMI and GRACE risk scores are accurate predictors of the presence and extent of coronary artery disease, patients were analyzed consecutively admitted to the Register of Acute Coronary Syndromes (Resca) that underwent coronary angiography without past revascularization. The predictive ability of the scores was analyzed in relation to the quantitative measure of the extent of coronary disease (Gensini score), the presence of any coronary artery disease and the presence of severe obstructive coronary disease.   Methods Sample selection Individuals consecutively admitted to the Coronary Care Unit of our Hospital between August 2007 and January 2009, with a diagnosis of unstable angina or myocardial infarction without ST segment elevation, were considered Resca candidates. The inclusion criteria for this record is defined by typical chest discomfort and at rest, in the last 48 hours, associated with at least one of the following: 1) positive marker of myocardial necrosis, defined by troponin T > 0.01 ug/L or troponin I > 0.034 mg/L, corresponding to percentile values 998.9; 2) ischemic electrocardiographic changes consisting of T wave inversion (> 0.1 mV) or transient depression of the segment ST (> 0.05 mV); 3) previously documented coronary artery disease, defined as myocardial stroke or history of previous angiography showing coronary obstruction > 50%. For this analysis, among the patients included in Resca, those undergoing invasive coronary angiography during hospitalization were selected. GRACE and TIMI scores For the calculation of the scores, clinical data from patient presentation were used in the emergency sector, electrocardiograms performed within the first six hours of care, troponin T doses referring to the first 12 hours of service and the value of the first creatinine plasma. Elevation marker of myocardial necrosis as component scores was defined as troponin T > 0.01 g/L or troponin I > 0.034 mg/L, in other words, above the 998.9 percentile. The Killip10 rating was also applied to patients with unstable angina so that the GRACE score could be calculated. The criteria previously defined in the respective validation score work were used. Briefly, the TIMI risk score consists of seven variables, all dichotomous. The presence of each variable adds one point to the total score, which ranges from zero to seven. These variables are related to the clinical presentation of acute coronary syndrome (ST segment depression, marker elevation of myocardial necrosis, > 1 angina episode in 24 hours) or previous characteristics of the patient (age > 65 years, aspirin use, obstruction coronary > 50%, > 3 risk factors for atherosclerotic disease). The GRACE score consists of eight variables: five of them computed semiquantitatively, in other words, it is weighted differently for each age range, systolic blood pressure, heart rate, blood creatinine and Killip's class; three of them computed dichotomously (ST segment depression, elevation of the myocardial necrosis marker, cardiac arrest on admission). The final score can range from 0 to 3723. Assessment of the extent of coronary artery disease The coronary anatomy was analyzed by a single and experienced hemodynamicist, which defined the extent of the coronary artery disease in two ways: quantitative and categorical. The quantitative analysis was performed by the Gensini score 11,12. Briefly, this scale measures the 28 coronary segments, which are scored according to its anatomical significance (ranging from 0.5 to 5) times the score of the maximum degree of obstruction (0-25% = 2; 26%-50% = 4; 51%-75% = 8; 76%-90% =16; 91%-99% = 32; 100% = 64 points). The score of 28 segments is added, resulting in the final score. From the categorical view, the anatomy was determined in two ways: by the presence of coronary artery disease (no obstruction > 70% or > 50% in the left main coronary artery); by the presence of severe coronary artery disease (obstruction > 70% in anterior descending, circumflex and right coronary artery, characterizing standard triple vessel or obstruction > 50% in the left main coronary artery). Data analysis Considering that the Gensini score showed non-normal distribution (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test), statistical analyzes were primarily nonparametric. To assess the association between risk scores (TIMI or GRACE) and the extent of the coronary artery disease, some analyzes were used. First, the linear association of each risk score with the Gensini score was assessed because of the Spearman correlation, while the linear regression was used to demonstrate the strength of influence of the value of the GRACE and TIMI scores, on the extent of coronary disease. Second, the Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare the values of the Gensini score between the divided groups according to tertiles of the risk scores. Third, receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to test the predictive accuracy of risk scores for the presence of coronary heart disease and severe coronary disease. Significant prediction occurred when the area under the curve was statistically different from 0.5. The sample size was estimated for correlation analysis and description of the areas under the ROC curve. For the first analysis, considering a minimum correlation coefficient of 0.25 and alpha of 0.05, a sample size of 96 patients would be sufficient to provide a statistical power of 80% in rejecting the null hypothesis of no correlation. In the second analysis, foreseeing an area under the ROC curve of 0.65, would require 100 patients (30 without disease and 70 without obstructive disease or 70 without severe disease and 30 with severe disease) to provide an accuracy of ± 0.12 in the confidence interval of the ROC curve, which would be enough to reject the null hypothesis of an area of 0.50. The scores were described as median and interquartile range (IQR) and the statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. SPSS Statistical Software (Version 9.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA) was used for analysis.   Results: Sample characteristics During the study period, 241 patients were admitted to Resca. Of these, 76 did not undergo coronary angiography during hospitalization and 53 had previous coronary artery bypass surgery. Thus, 112 patients were studied for the purpose of this study, age 70 ± 12 years, 51% male, 63% diagnosed with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) without ST-segment elevation and the others with unstable angina. The median GRACE score was 115 (IQR 91-141), while the TIMI score had a median of 3 (IQR 2-4), indicating a symmetric distribution of individuals between the low, intermediate and high risk groups. Killip classification > 1 and, at least, moderate systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction < 45%) were present in only 11% and 12% of patients, respectively. Other clinical characteristics are shown in Table 1.     In the analysis of coronary angiography, 71% of patients had, at least, one coronary obstruction > 70%. Severe coronary artery disease (three-vessel or left main coronary artery) has been present in 32% of the sample, biarterial in 18%, single vessel in 21% and the remaining 29% had non-obstructive coronary disease. The angiographic of Gensini score presented a median of 103 (IQR 65-155) and non-normal distribution (p < 0.001). Prediction of coronary anatomy using the GRACE score: There was a positive linear association between the GRACE score and Gensini score, represented by the Gensini regression formula = 48 + 0.65 x GRACE (p = 0.001). Although this relation is statistically significant, the Spearman correlation coefficient showed a weak degree of association (r = 0.23; p = 0.017) - Figure 1A. The Gensini score had a median of 85 (IQR = 60-128) in the first tertile of the GRACE score, median of 89 (67-167) in the second tertile, compared to a median of 132 (78-187) in the third tertile. This trend to greater extension of coronary disease, according to tercis of GRACE, did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.099) - Picture 1B. Despite the trends mentioned above, the GRACE score did not present discriminatory capacity between patients with and without coronary artery disease, showing an area under the ROC curve of 0.57 (95% CI = 0.46 to 0.69; p = 0.22) - Figure 1C. The prevalence of obstructive disease was similar between the first, second and third GRACE tertiles (respectively 66%, 71%, 77%, p = 0.58). The GRACE score was also not able to discriminate patients with or without severe coronary artery disease (trunk of the left or triarterial coronary artery) - area under the ROC curve of 0.59 (95% CI = 0,48- 0,70; p = 0 13) - Figure 1D. The prevalence of severe coronary artery disease did not differ significantly among the three tertiles of GRACE (respectively 25%, 33%, 37%, p = 0.56). Prediction of coronary anatomy by the TIMI score There was a positive linear association between the TIMI score and Gensini score, represented by the regression Gensini formula = 79 + 16 x TIMI (p = 0.009). Although this relationship is statistically significant, the Spearman coefficient correlation showed a weak association degree (r = 0.28; p = 0.003) - Figure 2A. The Gensini score had a median of 78 (IQR = 62-117) in the first tertile of the TIMI score, median of 107 (62-188) in the second tertile, compared to a median of 120 (95-166) in the third tertile (p = 0.024) - Figure 2B. The TIMI score showed discriminatory power among patients with or without coronary artery disease, but modest character, with an area under the ROC curve = 0.65 (95% CI = 0.55 - 0.76; p = 0.01) - Figure 2C. The prevalence of obstructive coronary disease tended to increase in line with rising tertiles of TIMI (61%, 69%, 86%, p = 0.056). Similarly, the TIMI score modestly discriminated patients with or without severe heart disease (left or triple vessel coronary trunk) - area under the ROC curve of 0.66; 95% CI = 0.56 to 0.76; p = 0.008 - Figure 2D. This modest discriminatory capacity is reflected in the lower prevalence of severe disease in the first GRACE tertile compared to the superior two tertiles (15%, 44%, 40% respectively; p = 0.10).   Discussion. This study does not confirm the initial hypothesis that the TIMI and GRACE scores predict accurately the presence and anatomic extent of coronary disease in patients with ACS. In this work, the coronary anatomy was described as quantitative variable (Gensini score) and as a categorical variable (presence of obstructive disease or severe disease). In the first case, there was a statistically significant correlation of the anatomy with both scores. This trend is confirmed by the dose-response gradient between the tertiles of the scores and the value of the Gensini score, statistically significant in the case of TIMI and borderline in the case of GRACE. These analyzes suggest that the prognostic information contained in scores is partially mediated by the extent of the coronary anatomy. When, in the meanwhile, the analysis of the strength of association of these scores is made with coronary anatomy, the results go in another direction. First, the weak correlation (r < 0.30) with the Gensini score shows that the calibration of prognostic scores to predict coronary anatomy is small. That is, using the regression formula for the extent of the coronary artery disease, there is a great difference between the predicted value and the observed value of the Gensini score. Second, there is a reasonable overlap of the IIQ of the Gensini score between the terciles of GRACE and TIMI. Third, the area under the ROC curve of the GRACE score is not statistically significant and the TIMI score, although statistically significant, reveals modest accuracy in the discrimination of patients with obstructive disease or severe disease (area < 0.70). These data indicate that the prognostic scores did not play a good role as predictive models of the coronary anatomy. It is known that prognosis of the coronary heart disease is directly influenced by the extent of arterial involvement 12. How then to explain that forecasting models are not good predictors models of anatomy? The answer to this question comes from the fact that the anatomical extent of the disease is only one of several determinants of severity in a multivariate model complex, typical of most biological systems. That is, the prognosis depends not only on the anatomy. Thus, these scores may be able to predict risk without necessarily predict anatomy in the same proportion. For example, on a single vessel, a patient may have a heart attack with severe left ventricular dysfunction if there is proximal involvement of the anterior descending causing severe ischemia of great extent. The severity of this patient would be reflected in the hemodynamic, electrocardiographic, necrosis markers that make up these scores. The GRACE score has superior prognostic value when compared to the TIMI score in different studies2,5,13. Paradoxically, TIMI showed better prediction of the anatomy. This finding may be explained by the fact that the TIMI score considers some variables specifically related to the existence of coronary disease 1. For example, one of the TIMI variables is exactly the prior knowledge that the patient has obstructive coronary artery disease; moreover, prior use of aspirin and many risk factors, unique variables of TIMI, mark more extensive coronary disease. The practical implications of the results should be discussed. The two scores are commonly used on clinical decision of ACS patients, in order to define the aggressiveness of the anti-thrombotic treatment and the stratification strategy, invasive or selective 14.15. This utility is grounded in established prognostic value of these scores and in the relationship of baseline risk with the magnitude of the benefit of certain strategies. It's important to note that our results do not contradict the value of scores in clinical decision. However, we must recognize that the usefulness of these would be higher if they were able to predict anatomy. This is because the invasive strategy, applied to from average to high risk patients according to the scores, is complete with a revascularization of the culprit artery. If the scores were better able to identify the presence of obstructive disease, they would identify patients whose invasive strategy is more useful. Another useful example would be in predicting patients with extensive disease, preventing the administration of certain anti-platelets that would increase the bleeding risk of any early surgery. As for originality, this is the first study that describes the association of the GRACE score with coronary anatomy. Regarding the TIMI score, there are four studies that evaluated this question4-7. They all describe a positive association between the value of the score and the extent of coronary artery disease. However, we know that association is not enough to ensure accuracy. This should be evaluated by calibration tests and discriminatory power among ill versus healthy (or severe versus non-severe disease). Being our work the only to perform this kind of analysis, our conclusion was contrary to the value of the TIMI score in predicting anatomy, different from previous studies that were limited to demonstrate the presence of the association between the TIMI score and number of affected arteries. Our data confirm the association with extent of disease, but show that this is insufficient to promote a satisfactory accuracy. Moreover, among the quoted studies, we were the first to measure the extent of coronary disease quantitatively by Gensini score. We must recognize the limitations of this study. First, selection bias in relation to the target population is the focus of our question, individuals with acute coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation. Ideally we should evaluate the entire sample of patients with diagnostic criteria of this clinical condition. However, only 60% of the individuals without previous surgery performed Coronariography, limiting the study sample. Although this feature is inherent in most coronary anatomy studies, this may cause a bias on assessing the accuracy of the risk scores on the anatomy. In practice, patients with low scores tend to be less subjected to coronary angiography. This bias reduces the specificity of the risk score to recognize patients without obstructive coronary disease. In other words, these scores would possibly recognize a number of patients as having no obstructive disease or severe disease, but these were not included in the analysis, as the reference standard (coronary angiography) was not performed. On the other hand, the sensitivity might be overestimated, because the group of patients who underwent coronary angiography tends to have a higher frequency of high scores values. This phenomenon is called verification bias 16. For that reason, we specifically avoid describing sensitivity and specificity, choosing the analysis of the area under the ROC curve, which represents a combined analysis of these two diagnostic properties. Our second limitation is the relatively small sample size. This feature was partially resolved by the data analysis approach. First, the description of coronary disease in the quantitatively (Gensini score) allowed sufficient statistical power for correlation analysis. Second, in the description of the area under the ROC curve, the sample size was sufficient to guarantee satisfactory accuracy. Still, we must recognize that future studies with larger numbers of patients will provide greater accuracy to our estimates. In conclusion, this study suggests that the TIMI and GRACE scores are not accurate tools for predicting the extent of coronary artery disease in patients with acute coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation. The usefulness of these scores on clinical reasoning should be limited to estimate the probability of recurrent cardiovascular events. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare that there is no relevant conflict of interests. Sources of Funding This study was partially funded by the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa da Bahia (FAPESB). Academic Association This article is part of Carolina Esteves Barbosa master's thesis at the Bahia Medical School.   