 SUMMARY background: THE accuracy of the score, GRACE and TIMI in predicting the extent of coronary heart disease in patients with acute coronary syndromes without supradesnivelamento of the ST segment (SCA) is not established. OBJECTIVE: to Test the hypothesis that scores for risk, GRACE, and TIMI predict satisfactorily the extent of coronary disease, in patients with SCA who underwent coronarography. METHODS: Individuals admitted with objective criteria of SCA and who underwent coronary angiography during hospitalization were consecutively analyzed. The coronary heart disease angiográfica was described in three ways: quantification of the extent of coronary heart disease by the score Gensini; the presence of any obstruction coronary artery (> 70% or > 50% when trunk coronary left); presence of severe disease (triarterial or trunk coronary left). RESULTS: In 112 patients evaluated, we observed a positive correlation of the score of Gensini with the scores GRACE (p = 0.017) and TIMI (p = 0.02), however this association was of low magnitude (r = 0,23 and r = 0.27; respectively). The score for GRACE was not able to predict coronary heart disease obstructive (area under the ROC curve = 0,57; 95%CI = 0,46 - 0,69), or coronary heart disease severe (ROC = 0,59; 95%CI = 0,48 -0,70). The Score TIMI proved to be a modest predictor in relation to the presence of coronary disease (ROC = 0,65; 95%CI = 0,55 - 0,76) and the presence of severe disease (ROC = 0,66; 95%CI = 0,56 - 0,76). CONCLUSION: (1) There is a positive association between the value of the scores TIMI or GRACE, and the extent of coronary artery disease in patients with SCA; (2) however, the degree of this association is not enough that these scores are predictors accurate of the results of coronary angiography. Key words: acute coronary Syndrome / complications; scoring propensity; coronary angiography / utilization; coronary vessels / anatomy & histology. Introduction Individuals hospitalized for acute coronary syndromes without supradesnivelamento of the ST segment (SCA) have a wide spectrum of severity, which varies according to clinical characteristics and laboratoriais1. In this way, the risk stratification is essential for proper clinical decision-making, distinguishing between individuals who benefit from the most aggressive strategies. It is demonstrated that the use of multivariate models in the form of scores represents the most accurate for the prediction of risk, higher than that obtained subjectively by the impression clínica2. The scores TIMI and GRACE are the most used and prognostic value established by cohort studies prospectiva1,3. In addition to prognostic evaluation, prediction of the extent of anatomical coronary heart disease is potentially useful for the clinical decision. This is because the prediction of disease obstructive (or severely obstructive) represents a further criterion in favour of the realization of coronary angiography, because this finding anticipates the need for myocardial revascularization. In this respect, some studies demonstrate the association between the value of the score, TIMI and the number of arteries affected by disease obstructive. In turn, none of these studies makes an analysis of the accuracy was discriminatory, leaving open the diagnostic value of this score for the presence and severity of the disease coronariana4-7. As to the score of GRACE, there are works that explore its association with coronary anatomy. In order to test the hypothesis that the scores of risk TIMI and GRACE are predictors accurate assay of the presence and extent of coronary heart disease obstructive, were analyzed in patients consecutively admitted to the Registry of Acute Coronary Syndromes (Resca) who underwent coronary angiography, with no past and revascularization surgery. The ability a predictor of the scores was examined in relation to the quantitative measure of the extent of coronary artery disease (score Gensini), the presence of any coronary heart disease obstructive and the presence of coronary heart disease obstructive severe degree. Methods sample Selection Individuals consecutively admitted to the Coronary Unit of our Hospital between August 2007 and January 2009, with a diagnosis of unstable angina or infarction without supradesnivelamento of the ST segment, were considered as candidates to Resca. The inclusion criterion for this registry is defined by discomfort precordial typical and at rest, in the last 48 hours, associated with at least one of the following characteristics: 1) marker of myocardial necrosis positive, defined by troponin T > 0,01 ug/L or troponin I > 0,034 ág/L, which corresponds to values above the percentile 998,9; 2) electrocardiographic abnormalities ischemia, consisting of T-wave inversion (> 0,1 mV) or infradesnivelamento transition of the ST segment (> 0,05 mV); 3) coronary artery disease previously documented, defined by history of myocardial infarction or angiography prior demonstrating obstruction coronary artery > 50%. For the present analysis, among the patients included in Resca, were selected from those undergoing coronary angiography is invasive during the internment. Scores GRACE and TIMI For the calculations of the scores were used for clinical data of the patient's presentation in the emergency room, records eletrocardiográficos performed within the first six hours of care, measurement of troponin T for the first 12 hours of attendance and the value of the first plasma creatinine. Elevation of a marker of myocardial necrosis as a component of the scores was defined as troponin T > 0,01 ug/L or troponin I > 0,034 ág/L, or above the percentile 998,9. The classification of Killip10 was also applied to patients with unstable angina in order that the score for GRACE was calculated. Were used the criteria, previously defined, in their work of validation of the scores. Briefly, Risk Scores TIMI consists of seven variables, all dichotomous. The presence of each variable adds a point to the total score, which ranges from zero to seven. These variables are related to the clinical presentation of acute coronary syndrome (infradesnivelamento of the ST segment, elevation of a marker of myocardial necrosis, > 1 episode of angina within 24 hours) or the characteristics of previous patients (age > 65 years, use of aspirin, obstruction coronary artery > 50%, > 3 risk factors for atherosclerotic disease)1. The score GRACE consists of eight variables: five of them computed in the way semi-quantitative, or different weight for each stratum of age, systolic blood pressure, heart rate, plasma creatinine, and class of Killip; three of them computed as a dichotomic variable (infradesnivelamento of the ST segment, elevation of a marker of myocardial necrosis, cardiac arrest on admission). The final score can vary from 0 to 3723. Assessment of the extent of coronary heart disease The coronary anatomy was analyzed by a single hemodinamicista experienced, which defined the extent of coronary heart disease in two ways: quantitative and categorical. The quantitative analysis was performed by the score of Gensini11,12. Briefly, this score evaluates the 28 segments of heart, which are ranked according to their importance to the anatomical (ranging from 0.5 to 5) multiplied by the score for the maximum degree of obstruction (0-25% = 2; 26%-50% = 4; 51%-75% = 8; 76%-90% =16; 91%-99% = 32; 100% = 64 points). The scores of the 28 segments are summed, resulting in the final score. From the point of view categorical, the anatomy was defined in two ways: the presence of coronary heart disease obstructive (obstruction > 70% or > 50% in trunk coronary left); presence of coronary heart disease severe (obstruction > 70% in the previous downward, circunflexa and coronary right, featuring standard triarterial or obstruction > 50% in the trunk of the coronary left). The analysis of the data Considering that the score Gensini presented non-normal distribution (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test), statistical analyses were primarily non-parametric. In order to assess the association between scores on risk (GRACE or TIMI) and extension of coronary disease, some analyses were used. First, the linear association of each score risk score Gensini was assessed by Spearman's correlation, while linear regression was used to demonstrate the strength of influence of the value of the scores GRACE or TIMI in the extension of coronary artery disease. Second, Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare the score values of Gensini between the groups divided according to the third of the scores of risk. Third, the curve receiver-operating characteristics (ROC) was used to test the accuracy of a predictor of the scores of risk in relation to the presence of coronary artery disease and coronary artery disease severe. Prediction significant occurred when the area under the curve was statistically different from 0.5. It has been estimated the sample size required for the analysis of correlation and the description of the areas below the ROC curve. For the first analysis, considering a correlation coefficient to a minimum of 0.25 and alpha of 0.05, a sample size of 96 patients would be sufficient to provide a statistical power of 80% in the rejection of the null hypothesis of absence of correlation. In the second analysis, leading up to an area below the ROC curve of 0.65 would require 100 patients (30 without the disease and 70 without the disease obstructive or 70 without severe disease, and 30 with severe disease) to provide an accuracy of ± 0,12 in the confidence interval of the ROC curve, which would be enough to reject the null hypothesis of area of 0.50. The scores were described in median and interquartile range (IQR), and statistical significance was defined by p < 0.05. SPSS Statistical Software (Version 9.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA) was used for data analysis. Results sample Characteristics During the study period, 241 patients were admitted in Resca. Of these, 76 have not performed coronary angiography during the hospitalisation and 53 had myocardial revascularization surgery prior. In this way, were studied 112 patients for the purpose of the present study, age 70 ± 12 years, 51% male, 63% with a diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) without supradesnivelamento of the ST segment and the other with unstable angina. The median score for GRACE was 115 (IQR 91 - 141), while the score TIMI presented a median of 3 (IQR 2 - 4), indicating a symmetric distribution of the individuals between ranges of low, intermediate and high risk. Classification of Killip > 1, and systolic dysfunction of at least moderate (ejection fraction < 45%) were present in only 11% and 12% of patients, respectively. Other clinical characteristics are shown in Table 1. In the analysis of coronary angiography, 71% of patients had at least one obstruction of the coronary artery > 70%. Coronary heart disease severe (triarterial or trunk coronary left) was present in 32% of the sample, biarterial in 18%, uniarterial at 21% and the 29% remaining did not have coronary heart disease obstructive. The score angiographic of Gensini presented a median of 103 (IQR 65 - 155) and non-normal distribution (p < 0.001). Prediction of coronary anatomy by the score of GRACE, There was a linear association positive between the score of GRACE, and the score Gensini, represented by the regression formula Gensini = 48 + 0.65 x GRACE (p = 0.001). Although this relationship is statistically significant, the Spearman correlation coefficient indicated a weak degree of association (r = 0,23; p = 0.017) - Figure 1A. The score Gensini presented a median of 85 (IQR = 60 - 128) in the first tercil Score GRACE a median of 89 (67 - for- 167) in the second tercil, compared to a median of 132 (78 - for- 187) in the third tercil. This tendency of greater extension of the coronary heart disease according to third of GRACE did not reach statistical significance (p = 0,099) - Figure 1B. In spite of the trends described above, the score for GRACE is not presented capacity-discriminatory between patients with or without coronary heart disease obstructive, taking the area under the ROC curve of 0.57 (95% CI = 0,46 - 0,69; p = 0.22) - Figure 1C. The prevalence of the disease obstructive was similar between the first, second, and third third of the GRACE respectively, 66%, 71%, 77%; p = 0.58). The score GRACE also was not able to discriminate patients with or without coronary heart disease severe (trunk coronary left or triarterial) - area under the ROC curve of 0.59 (95% CI = 0,48 - 0,70; p = 0.13) - Figure 1D. The prevalence of coronary heart disease severe not differ significantly between the three third GRACE (respectively, 25%, 33%, 37%; p = 0.56). Prediction of coronary anatomy by score TIMI There was a linear association positive between the score TIMI and the score Gensini, represented by the regression formula Gensini = 79 + 16 x TIMI (p = 0.009). Although this relationship is statistically significant, the Spearman correlation coefficient indicated a weak degree of association (r = 0,28; p = 0.003) - Figure 2A. The score Gensini presented a median of 78 (IQR = 62 - 117) in the first tercil score, TIMI, a median of 107 (62 - for- 188) in the second tercil, compared to a median of 120 (95 - 166) in the third tercil (p = 0.024) - Figure 2B. The score TIMI presented capacity-discriminatory between patients with or without coronary heart disease obstructive, but of character, modest, with an area under the ROC curve = 0,65 (95% CI = 0,55 - 0,76; p = 0.01) - Figure 2C. The prevalence of coronary heart disease obstructive sleep showed a tendency to increase according to third ascendants of the TIMI (61%, 69%, 86%; p = 0.056). The same have been, the score TIMI discriminated modestly patients with or without coronary artery disease severe (trunk coronary left or triarterial) - area under the ROC curve 0.66; 95% CI = 0,56 - 0,76; p = 0.008 - Figure 2D. This modest capacity discriminatory if reflected in a lower prevalence of severe disease in the first tercil of GRACE when compared to the two third upper (15%, 44%, 40%, respectively; p = 0.10). Discussion The present study does not confirm the initial hypothesis that the scores TIMI and GRACE predict accurately the presence and extent of anatomical of coronary artery disease in patients with SCA. In this work, the coronary anatomy has been described as a quantitative variable (score Gensini) and as a categorical variable (presence of disease-obstructive or severe disease). In the first case, there was a correlation statistically significant of the anatomy with both scores. This trend is confirmed by the gradient of the dose-response between the third score and the value score Gensini, statistically significant in the case of the TIMI and borderline in the case of GRACE. These analyses suggest that the information prognostic contained in the scores is partially mediated by the extent of the anatomy of the coronary artery. When, however, analysis is made of the strength of association of these scores with the coronary anatomy, the results go in the other direction. First, the weak correlation (r < 0,30) with the score Gensini demonstrates that the calibration of the scores predictor to predict coronary anatomy is small. That is, using the regression formula for the extension of coronary heart disease, there is a great difference between the value predicted and the observed value of the score Gensini. Second, there is a reasonable superposition of the IIQ score Gensini between the third of the GRACE or TIMI. Third, the area under the ROC curve of the score for GRACE is not statistically significant and the score, TIMI, although statistically significant, reveals modest accuracy in the discrimination of patients with chronic obstructive, or with severe disease (area < 0,70). These data indicate that the scores predictor does not play a good role as models of predictors of anatomy, coronary. It is known that prognosis of coronary heart disease is directly influenced by the extent of the involvement arterial12. How to explain then that the models predictions are not good models of predictors of the anatomy? The answer to this question comes from the fact that the extent of anatomical disease represents only one of several determinants of severity in a model of multivariate complex, typical of most biological systems. That is, the prognosis depends not only on the anatomy. Therefore, these scores may be able to predict risk, without necessarily predicting the anatomy in the same proportion. For example, even uniarterial, a patient may present with an infarction with severe left ventricular dysfunction if there is impairment in proximal of the previous downward causing ischemia severe to great extent. The severity of this patient would be reflected in hemodynamic variables, electrocardiographic, markers of necrosis which constitute these scores. The score GRACE has a superior prognostic value when compared to score TIMI in different trabalhos2,5,13. Paradoxically, the TIMI demonstrated better prediction of the anatomy. This finding can be explained by the fact the score TIMI consider some of the variables specifically related to the existence of the disease coronariana1. For example, one of the variables of the TIMI exactly is the prior knowledge that the patient has coronary heart disease, obstructive; in addition, prior use of aspirin and the number of risk factors, variables exclusive to TIMI, mark coronary heart disease more extensive. The practical implications of the found results should be discussed. The two scores are commonly used in clinical decision-making of patients with SCA, in order to set the aggressiveness of the treatment antithrombotic strategy and stratification, invasive or seletiva14,15. This utility is based on the prognostic value established on these scores and in the relationship between the baseline risk with the magnitude of the benefit of certain strategies. It is important to emphasize that our results do not contradict the value of the scores on the clinical decision-making. However, we must recognize that the usefulness of these would be greater if they were able to predict the anatomy. This is because the strategy invasive, applied to at-risk patients medium-to-high agreement with the scores, is complete with a procedure for the revascularization of the artery responsible and guilty. If the scores were able to better identify the presence of disease obstructive, would identify patients whose strategy invasive is more useful. Another example of usefulness would be the prediction of patients with extensive disease, preventing the administration of certain antiplatelet drugs that increase the risk of bleeding as a possible early surgery. As to originality, this is the first study that describes the association of the score of GRACE with coronary anatomy. In relation to the score, TIMI, there are four studies that evaluated this questão4-7. All describe a positive association between the value of the score and the extent of coronary heart disease. However, we know that association is not enough to guarantee accuracy. This should be evaluated by tests of calibration and capacity-discriminatory between patients versus healthy (or disease severe versus not severe). Being our work the only one doing this type of analysis, our conclusion was contrary to the value of the score TIMI in predicting the anatomy, unlike previous works that simply demonstrate the presence of association between the score TIMI and the number of arteries affected. Our data confirm the association with the extension of the disease, however, demonstrate that this is insufficient to promote the accuracy was satisfactory. In addition, among the studies cited, we were the first to measure the extent of coronary artery disease quantitatively, by the score Gensini. We must recognize the limitations of the present study. In the first place, the selection bias in relation to the target population, which represents the focus of our issue, individuals with acute coronary syndromes without supradesnivelamento of the ST segment. Ideally we should evaluate the whole sample of patients with diagnostic criteria of this clinical condition. However, only 60% of individuals without previous surgery underwent coronary angiography, limiting the sample of the study. Although such a feature is inherent in most studies of coronary anatomy, this can cause a bias in the evaluation of the accuracy of the scores of risk as to the anatomy. In practice, patients with score low tend to be less subjected to coronary angiography. This bias reduces the specificity of the score risk in recognizing patients without coronary heart disease obstructive. Or, possibly these scores might recognize a certain number of patients as non-carriers of disease obstructive or severe disease, but these were not counted in the analysis as the reference standard (angiography) has not been performed. On the other hand, the sensitivity may be overestimated, because the group of patients who underwent coronary angiography tend to have a higher frequency of high values of the scores. This phenomenon is called the bias of verificação16. For this reason, we avoid to describe specifically sensitivity and specificity, opting for the analysis of the area under the ROC curve, which represents a the analysis combined those two properties diagnósticas17. Our second limitation is the sample size relatively small. This characteristic has been partially solved by the approach of the analysis of the data. First, the description of coronary artery disease in the form of quantitative (score Gensini) has statistical power sufficient for correlation analysis. Second, in the description of the area below the ROC curve, the sample size was sufficient to ensure a precision satisfactory. Even so, we must recognize that future studies with larger number of patients will provide greater precision to our estimates. In conclusion, the present study suggests that the scores TIMI and GRACE are not tools accurate for the prediction of the extent of coronary disease in patients with acute coronary syndromes without supradesnivelamento of the ST segment. The usefulness of these scores in clinical reasoning should be limited to the estimation of the probability of cardiovascular events from recurring. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study was partially funded by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa da Bahia (FAPESB). Study association This article is part of the master's thesis of Carolina Esteves Barbosa Escola Bahiana de Medicina. 