OBJECTIVE: To correlate tomographic findings with pulmonary function on patients with silicosis and to compare the results of computed Tomography (HRCT) with those of the chest X-ray. METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study, which evaluated 44 non-smokers with no history of tuberculosis. The x-rays were classified according to the proposal of the International Labour Organization. Using a semiquantitative system, the following TCAR findings were quantified: total lung involvement, parenchymal opacities and emphysema. Spirometry, forced oscillation, the evaluation of lung volumes by the helium dilution technique and measurement of the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO, carbon monoxide diffusing capacity) were performed. RESULTS: Of the 44 patients studied, 41 were male, with a mean age of 48.4 years. In the comparative analysis, 4 patients classified as 0 category by the x-ray were reclassified as category 1 by HRCT and, while the X-ray diagnosed 23 cases of progressive massive fibrosis, HRCT established the diagnosis in 33 patients. For opacity score, the highest correlations were observed with the flow, DLCO and complacency. Emphysema was negatively correlated with the volume, DLCO and flow. In this sample with a predominance of large opacities (75% of individuals), the deterioration of lung function was associated with the extent of structural changes. CONCLUSIONS: In silicosis, TCAR scans are superior to X-ray, both in the early detection of the disease and in the identification of progressive massive fibrosis. Keywords: Silicosis; Occupational diseases; X-ray computed tomography; Respiratory function tests.     Introduction Nowadays, chest X-ray, together with the history of occupational exposure to free silica, is the main method of diagnosis for silicosis, following the standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO, International Labour Organization).(1) However, High-Resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT) stands at an increasingly prominent place in assessing this disease, providing important information, both in the early detection of small opacities and emphysema as well as in the identification of complications.(2-4) With regard to pulmonary function tests in patients with silicosis, though not used as tools for diagnosis, they are widely used to follow these individuals longitudinally.(3.4) Once the imaging and the functional tests are the most used diagnostic tools following individuals with silicosis, it is essential to establish the correlation between these two methods. Because of its increased sensitivity, TCAR has been the imaging method most used for this purpose. However, in image correlation studies with lung function, the quantification of the disease severity, through functional testing, is impaired by the presence of smoking and associated pulmonary emphysema. Fact that is highlighted by most researchers.(5-10) The aim of this study is to correlate tomographic findings with pulmonary function in patients with non-smoking silicosis and compare the TCAR findings with the chest radiography.   Methods A descriptive study that evaluated 53 non-smokers with a history of exposure to silica was performed. The participation of these individuals occurred after the knowledge of the purpose of the study and with prior consent. The protocol was approved by the Committee of Research in Ethics of our institution. As inclusion criteria, the history of exposure to silica lasting at least 10 years; and radiography (or HRCT) compatible with silicosis images were included. Smokers and former smokers and those who had radiological findings suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis were excluded. After applying these criteria, 9 patients were excluded, 4 of them with tomographic findings compatible with pulmonary tuberculosis. The tests were performed within one month, in the following order: pulmonary function; chest X-ray; and HRCT. The chest radiography was performed in the anteroposterior position with a Siemens device (LX30 model, Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany) and with the following technique: distance of 180 cm between focus and film; regime 80 kVp; exposure time of 0.04 ms. Readings were made independently by three readers certified by Fundacentro/Ministry of Labor and Employment. For simplification reasons, the classification of small opacities was made in summary format (0/, 0/0 or 0/1 = 0, 1/0, 1/1 or 1/2 = 1/2/1, 2/2 or 2/3 = 2, 3/2, 3/3, or 3/+ = 3). The large opacities were classified into the types A, B and C, according to the standards provided by the ILO.(1) The results were summarized as the average of the readings. Pulmonary function tests were made by forced oscillation technique (TOF), spirometry, lung volumes by dilution method with helium, and measurement of diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO, carbon monoxide diffusing capacity). The TOF was performed using an impedance analyzer, the following parameters being evaluated: total respiratory resistance, resistance related to respiratory airways and dynamic compliance (Crs, dyn, and compliance of the respiratory system). Other tests were carried out on the system Collins Plus Pulmonary Function Testing Systems (Warren E. Collins, Inc., Braintree, MA, USA) and followed the standardization and interpretation of the Brazilian Society of Pulmonology and Tisiology(11) The Pereira (spirometry) and Neder (static lung volumes and diffusion) equations were adopted in the interpretation of the following parameters: (12-14) • spirometry: forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), the FEV1/FVC ratio, forced expiratory flow between 25-75% of FVC (FEF 25-75%) and FEF 25-75%/FVC ratio • dilution method with helium: residual volume (RV), total lung capacity (TLC) and RV/TLC ratio • single breath method for DLCO HRCT was performed with a GE appliance (HiSpeed model; General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA) and with the following technique: cuts with a 1.0 mm thickness, time interval of 1.5s and 10 mm increment; image reconstruction with a 512 × 512 pixel matrix, using high-resolution algorithm; window width 1000 UH; average window level of 700 UH. The interpretation of tomographic findings was made by consensus among four radiologists who were previously trained for a month in the use of the adopted categorization. Small opacities were classified into four categories according to their wealth, similar to what is done with chest X-ray: 0) no micronodules 1) small number of micronodules, but without blurring vessels 2) large number of micronodules, with or without blurring vessels, but without confluency 3) convergence nodes < 10mm, usually associated with severe blurring vessels Large opacities are classified as type 
A (one or more opacities > 10 mm, the sum of the diameter was < 50 mm) or B (one or more opacities was the sum of diameters < 50 mm).(9,10,15-17) Subsequently, the HRCT was evaluated in regards to the extent of pulmonary involvement, considering five cut levels: origin of major vessels; aortic arch; carina; confluence of the pulmonary veins; and 1 cm above the right diaphragm.(18) Using a semiquantitative evaluation system, each of these levels (right and left separately, totaling 10 levels) was analyzed according to the following: (9.10) • total length score of the lung involvement - Thoth (including nodules, masses, emphysema and other parenchymal changes): 0) no alteration 1) pulmonary involvement < 5% of the area 2) pulmonary involvement from > 5% - < 25% of the area 3) pulmonary involvement from > 25-49% of the area 4) pulmonary involvement from 50-75% of the area 5) pulmonary involvement > 75% of the area • extension score of parenchymal opacities (Opac), including nodules and masses: 0) no parenchymal opacity 1) opacities involving parenchymal < 5% of area 2) surrounding parenchymal opacities > 5% - < 25% of area 3) parenchymal opacities involving > 25% -49% of the area 4) parenchymal opacities involving 50% -75% of the area 5) parenchymal opacities involving > 75% of the area • emphysema extension score (Nurse): 0) no emphysema 1) emphysema affecting < 5% of the area 2) emphysema affecting > 5 < 25% of the area 3) emphysema affecting > 25-49% of the area 4) emphysema affecting 50-75% of the area 5) emphysema affecting > 75% of the area to analyze the scores, estimated pulmonary involvement was obtained by applying a factor of influence (weight), for correcting volume differences in each level, as follows: origin of major vessels (0.129); aortic arch (0.190); carina (0.222); confluence of the pulmonary veins (0.228); 1 cm above the right diaphragm (0.230).(19) Finally, by adding the scores for each level, we obtained the Tot values, Opac and Enf (the highest possible score for each patient = 10). An example of obtaining these scores is shown on Figure 1. In the statistical analysis, we used the Epi Info 6.04 and Statistica 5.1 (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). For a description of the data, standard deviations and frequencies and means were used. In the radiological readings' comparison, the calculation of the correlation coefficient was applied. To compare the means of functional parameters between the different TCAR categories, the analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used. All continuous variables were analyzed to verify the distribution of normality, according to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. We opted for the use of parametric Pearson method in the study of correlations between functional indexes and tomographic scores. In this work, the results were considered significant at p < 0.05.   Results Of the 44 patients evaluated, 41 were men, with an average age of 48.4 years. The average time of exposure to silica and the average time off were 16.1 and 16.9 years, respectively. Among professional activities, the most frequently named were sandblasting (45.5%) and lapping (34.1%). Other occupations quoted were: marble (6.8%), quarry (4.5%), casting (4.5%), manufacture of dental prostheses (2.3%) and Grinder (2.3%). In the evaluation of chest X-ray, 19 tests had technical quality of level 1 and 25 of level 2. The distribution of individuals in the ILO radiological categories for small opacities was as follows: category 0-4 (9.1%); category 1-22 (50%); category 2-14 (31.8%); and category 3-4 (9.1%). As for the shape and size of small opacities, the x-rays were classified as qq = 14; rq = 7; pq = 5; qr = 4; pp = 3; qp = 3; rr = 3; or qt = 1. For the classification of large opacities, it was found that four patients presented large opacity of type A (9.1%), 12 of type B (27.3%), 7 of type C (15.9%) and 21 (47.7%) did not have this kind of injury on thorax radiography. The most frequently observed signs were: ax (coalescence of small opacities, 22 cases); cn (calcification in small opacities, 14 cases); co (abnormalities in the shape and/or size of the heart 14 cases); and di (distortion in the intrathoracic structure, 12 cases). The analysis of the interobserver agreement for profusion of small opacities (categories 0, 1, 2 and 3) and large opacities type (type 0, A, B and C) showed kappa coefficient of 0.31 (p < 0.001) and 0 75 (p < 0.001), respectively. The HRCT findings observed were: Micronodules in 44 cases (100%), with identification of confluences in six tests; Large opacities consistent with a diagnosis of progressive massive fibrosis (PMF) in 33 cases (75%); emphysema in 27 cases (61.4%), 21 of them of scar-related type and 6 of the panacinar type (24 cases of emphysema presented association with FMP); pleural thickening located in 14 cases (31.8%), 10 of them associated with FMP; and intrathoracic lymph node enlargement in 28 cases (63.6%). Comparisons between the classification of X-ray and TCAR for small and large opacities are shown in Tables 1 and 2. With regard to small opacities, there was an agreement between the two methods in 56.8% of cases. In this sample, 4 patients classified in category 0 by the x-ray were reclassified as category 1 by TCAR. For large opacities, the correlation between the two methods occurred in 70.5% of the patients. While the X-ray diagnosed 23 cases of FMP, TCAR established the diagnosis in 33 patients.     The mean and standard deviation of pulmonary function indexes as well as the distribution of these values according to TCAR classification are shown in Table 3. For large opacities, we observed statistically significant differences in flow measurements, Crs, dyn and DLCO. Regarding the functional pattern, 14 individuals had obstructive disorder (mild in 13 cases, moderate in 1 case), 13 had mixed disorder (mild in 8 cases, moderate in 3 and severe in 2 cases). Eleven had restrictive lung disease (mild in 8 cases, moderate in 2 cases and severe in 1 case) and 6 had normal spirometric indexes and static volumes. In this study, 29 individuals showed reduction of DLCO, which is graded as mild in 15, moderate in 12 and severe in 2. Regarding the HRCT scores, the mean values of TID, parenchymal opacities and emphysema were 3.7, 3.3 and 1.5, respectively. The values of the correlation coefficients between the functional parameters and obtained by the tomographic analyses are shown in Table 4. For the opacity score, the highest correlations were observed with the flow measurements, DLCO and Crs, dyn. The emphysema already was negatively correlated with the measurements of volume, DLCO and flow.     Discussing the study of morphofunctional correlation is essential to eliminate the influence of any other factor, beyond the analyzed one, in the lung function. In silicosis, almost all jobs previously reported included smokers and former smokers, and patients with a history of tuberculosis.(5,8-10) However, in this study, great care was taken in order to remove the effects of tobacco and tuberculosis sequel in functional tests. To this purpose, until reach the ideal sample, the recruitment of patients from various referral centers for silicosis of the State of Rio de Janeiro was necessary. By convention, silicosis-related lesions are assessed radiologically according to the international classification of pneumoconiosis ILO, which was created for epidemiological purposes.(1) However, its use in clinical diagnosis is debatable, particularly in what concerns these two aspects: the high interobserver variability when reading X-rays, especially to low profusion categories, and the fact that the ILO classification may underestimate the presence of pulmonary disease.(16) In the present study, we observed greater disagreement among sensors for the categories of small opacities. For large opacities, the interindividual variability in the readings was low. These data are in agreement with other studies, which also showed higher kappa values for large opacities.(4,9,16-17) Despite these limitations, the chest X-ray remains the most effective instrument in the monitoring of workers exposed to silica, as it has low cost and low radiation dose.(2) Several studies have been conducted to establish the role of TCAR in the early detection of small opacities. A study showed that 13 of 32 individuals with a history of exposure to silica and standard radiography had evidence of silicosis in TCAR.(16) A study in our country, including 68 former miners, consent of radiography results and TCAR in 55 cases and divergence in 13, with TCAR adding 5 new diagnoses of silicosis and, on the other hand, removing 8.(17) In this study's sample, 4 patients classified as category 0 by radiography were reclassified as category 1 by HRCT, which reinforces the value of the latter test. As for the ability to detect large opacities, the superiority of CT compared to chest X-ray is well established. A study with HRCT of 76 patients observed 10 cases of PMF among the 26 that were classified as simple silicosis by X-ray.(10) In this study, HRCT, compared to radiography, added 10 new diagnoses of FMP, confirming the greater sensitivity of the method in the detection of silicosis. Another interesting finding is the detection of emphysema, which was diagnosed in 27 patients (61.4% of the cases). Considering the fact that the sample consisted exclusively of non-smokers, emphysema finding in this study can be attributed to the presence of PMF or to the silica dust itself. Still regarding TCAR, we observed pleural thickening in 31.8% of the cases (all type located), unlike other work, not excluding individuals with a history of tuberculosis (31% of patients) observed this abnormality in 58 2% of cases, most of them of the diffuse type.(20) According to the authors, even though there is the possibility of the diffuse pleural thickening causing restrictive functional damage, the clinical significance of this finding in silicosis is still uncertain.(20) With respect to lung function, we observed that the obstructive disorder was quite common, being diagnosed in 61.4% of cases (obstructive or mixed). In silicosis, airflow limitation is caused by several factors, such as secondary broncoestenoses to peribronchial fibrosis, the presence of lymph node enlargement and the existence of centriacinar emphysema.(10,21) In this study, however, it is possible that the large opacities and scar-related emphysema associated with them are the main mechanisms responsible for obstructive phenomenon, since 75% of patients had FMP in the TCAR. These masses of PMF, formed by clusters of fibrotic nodules, can distort the normal lung parenchyma and cause an irregular increase of adjacent airspaces, which ultimately limits the pulmonary flow.(10,22,23,24) In regards to the comparison of average lung function between the different HRCT categories, we note that, for small opacities, there was no significant difference in no single functional parameter with the progression of the evaluated categories; which agrees with another study. This reinforces the notion that micro nodules detected by TCAR didn't influence, per se, functional deterioration.(15) However, for large opacities, we observed a progressive decrease in DLCO values, Crs, dyn and airflow with increasing rank. These findings are consistent with other studies, which also showed a higher correlation of functional damage to the extent of large opacities.(5.9 to 10.23) Thus, the presence of these injuries on TCAR can be used as an important indicator of disease severity.(9,10,25) In the studied sample, as well as previously published works, the parenchymal opacity correlated negatively with reduced DLCO.(3,5,10,23) Some researchers attributed this association to the presence of PMF, since these large masses of fibrosis, with advancing disease, tend to contract. This determines the appearance of scar-related emphysema and decrease in the available area for gas exchange, which reduces the extent of pulmonary diffusion.(5,10,23) The analysis of the obtained association between parenchymal opacities and Crs, dyn is interesting, since, to our knowledge, there are no studies correlating compliance values with TCAR findings. Crs, dyn represents in practice the ease with which the respiratory system, including the lungs and chest wall, achieves the CPT.(26) In silicosis, intensified pleropulmonar involvement justifies its reduction. Thus, since the measurement is made through a noninvasive mean, Crs, dyn might become in the future, a further functional parameter in the monitoring of silicosis.(27) Furthermore, our results indicate that the deterioration of lung function in patients with silicosis individuals, non-smoking, is associated with the extent of structural changes in a sample with a predominance of large opacities (75% of subjects). According to the previous work, we observed significant correlations between Enf and flow measurements, volume and distribution. However, the correlation coefficients were slightly lower than those found by other authors, who used the smoking population in their samples.(5.8 to 10.23) Thus, once again, the explanation lies with smoking, which is known for reducing the flow and dissemination of values. A critical analysis of the results and the limitations of this work is relevant. In occupational history, the dose and the amount of exposure were not quantified, which would be interesting for a better understanding of morphofunctional correlations. Another limitation is that, in the TCAR reading was not evaluated the concordance coefficient. Thus, the interpretation of tomographic findings, by consensus, may imply a possible acceptance by the less experienced readers of the most experienced ones, constituting a methodological bias. In conclusion, our study shows that the HRCT's performance in the diagnosis of silicosis, is superior to the thorax X-ray, both in the early detection of early stages of the disease and in the identification of PMF.   