 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Correlate the parameters ct with those of pulmonary function in patients with silicosis, as well as to compare the results of high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) with chest radiography. METHODS: we performed a cross-sectional study, in which they were evaluated 44 patients non-smokers and without a past history of tuberculosis. The radiographs were classified according to the proposal of the International Labour Organisation. Using a system of score semi-quantitative, the following findings on HRCT were quantified: total extent of lung involvement, parenchymatous opacity, and emphysema. Were performed spirometry, oscillations, forced, assessment of lung volumes by the technique of dilution with helium and measurement of the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO, diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide). RESULTS: Of the 44 patients studied, 41 were men, with a mean age of 48.4 years. In the comparative analysis, 4 patients classified in category 0 by radiography were reclassified in the category 1 by HRCT and, while the x-ray diagnosed 23 cases of fibrosis, massive progressive, HRCT has established this diagnosis in 33 patients. For the score of opacities, the largest correlations were observed with measures of flow, DLCO and complacency. Already the emphysema was correlated negatively with the volume measurements, DLCO and flow. In this sample, with a predominance of large opacities (75% of the individuals), the deterioration of pulmonary function was associated with the extent of the structural changes. CONCLUSIONS: silicosis, HRCT is superior to radiography for both in the early detection of the disease and in the identification of fibrosis massive progressive. Keywords: Silicosis; occupational Disease; computed Tomography X-ray; respiratory function Tests. Introduction In the current days, the chest radiograph, combined with a history of occupational exposure to free silica, is the main method of diagnosis of silicosis, following the standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO, International Labour Organization). (1) However, increasingly the high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) has a place of prominence in the assessment of this disease, providing important additional information, both in the early detection of small opacities and emphysema as well as in the identification of complications. (2-4) in relation to pulmonary function tests in patients with silicosis, although they are not used as tools for the diagnosis, are widely employed to monitor in direction of these individuals. (3,4) since the imaging tests and the functional tests are the diagnostic tools most commonly used in the follow-up of individuals with silicosis, it becomes fundamental to establish the correlation between these two methods. Due to its higher sensitivity, HRCT has been the method most used for such a purpose. However, in studies of the correlation of the image with the lung function, the quantification of the severity of the disease by means of functional tests is hampered by the presence of smoking and pulmonary emphysema associated with, a fact highlighted by most researchers. (5-10) The aim of the present study is to correlate the parameters ct with those of pulmonary function in patients with non-smokers of silicosis, as well as to compare the findings of HRCT with chest radiograph. Methods we conducted a descriptive study in which were evaluated 53 individuals with non-smokers with history of exposure to silica. The participation of these individuals occurred after the science as to the purpose of the study and with the prior consent. The protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee in Research of our institution. Were adopted as inclusion criteria, the history of exposure to silica and with duration of at least 10 years; and radiographs (or HRCT) images compatible with silicosis. Excluded were patients smokers and ex-smokers and those who had radiological findings suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis. After the application of these criteria, 9 patients were excluded, 4 of them with ct scan findings but compatible with pulmonary tuberculosis. The examinations were performed with a maximum interval of a month, in obedience to the following order: pulmonary function; chest radiography; and HRCT. The chest radiography was performed in the position póstero-anterior with a unit of Siemens (model LX30; Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany) and with the following technique: distance of 180 cm between focus and film; scheme 80 kVp; exposure time of 0.04 ms. The readings were made independently by three readers approved by Fundacentro/Ministry of Labour and Employment. By reason of simplification, the classification of profusion of small opacities was made in summary form (0/–, 0/0, or 0/1 = 0; 1/0, 1/1, or 1/2 = 1/2/1, 2/2, or 2/3 = 2; 3/2, 3/3, or 3/+ = 3). The large opacities were classified into types A, B, and C, according to the standards provided by ILO. (1) The results were summarised by the median of the readings. Pulmonary function tests were set up by technique of the oscillations forced (TOF), spirometry, assessment of lung volumes by the method of dilution with helium, and the measurement of diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO, diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide). The TOF was performed by means of an analyzer of impedance, being evaluated the following parameters: total resistance of the respiratory system, resistance related to airway, and dynamic respiratory compliance (Crs,dyn, the dynamic compliance of the respiratory system). The other tests were performed on the system Collins Plus Pulmonary Function Testing Systems (Warren E. Collins, Inc., Braintree, MA, USA) and followed the standardization and interpretation of the Brazilian Society of Pneumology and Tisiology. (11) Were adopted, the equations of Pereira (spirometry) and Neder (lung volumes, static and diffusion) in the interpretation of the following parameters:(12-14) • spirometry: forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), ratio FEV1/FVC, forced expiratory flow between 25-75% of FVC (FEF25-75%) and the ratio FEF25-75%/FVC • method of dilution with helium: residual volume (RV), total lung capacity (TLC) and the relationship VR/CPT • method of breathing only for the DLCO was Held on HRCT with a unit of GE (model hi-speed; General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA) and with the following technique: cuts with a thickness of 1.0 mm, time interval of 1.5 s and an increment of 10 mm; reconstruction of the image with a matrix of 512 × 512 points, using the algorithm of high resolution; the width of the window of 1000 UH; medium-level window of -700 HU. The interpretation of the ct scan findings but was made consensually between the four radiologists who, during a month, were previously trained for the use of the classification adopted. The small opacities were classified into four categories, according to their profusion, in a similar way to that makes with the x-ray of thorax: 0) absence of micronodules 1) small number of micronodules, however without blurring of vessels 2) large number of micronodules, with or without blurring of vessels, but without the confluence of 3) confluence of nodules <10mm, usually associated with a sharp blurring of vessels in The large opacities were classified into type a (one or more opacities >10 mm for which the sum of the diameters was <50 mm) or B (one or more opacities whose sum of diameter was <50 mm). (9,10,15-17) Later, the HRCT was evaluated as to the extent of lung involvement, considering the five levels of court: the origin of the great vessels; croça of the aorta; carina; the confluence of the pulmonary veins, and 1 cm above the diaphragm right. (18) Through a system of assessment semiquantitative, each of these levels (right and left, separately, total 10 levels) was analyzed for the following aspects:(9,10) • score total extent of lung involvement - Tot (including nodules, masses, emphysema, and other parenchymal abnormalities): 0) no change 1) lung involvement <5% of area 2) lung involvement between >5%-<25% of area 3) lung involvement between >25-49% of area 4) lung involvement between 50-75% of the area 5) lung involvement >75% of the area • score of extension of the parenchymatous opacity (Opac), including nodules and masses: 0) no opacity parenchymal 1) parenchymatous opacity involving <5% of area 2) parenchymatous opacity involving >5%-<25% of area 3) parenchymatous opacity involving >25%-49% of the area 4) parenchymatous opacity involving 50%-75% of the area 5) parenchymatous opacity involving >75% the area • score of extent of emphysema (Enf): 0) no emphysema, 1) emphysema, involving <5% of area 2) emphysema, involving >5-<25% of area; 3) emphysema, involving >25-49% of the area 4) emphysema, involving 50-75% of the area 5) emphysema, involving >75% of the area For the analysis of the scores, the estimate of lung involvement was obtained by the application of an influence factor (weight) for correcting volume differences in each level, as follows: the origin of the great vessels (0,129); croça of the aorta (0,190); carina (0,222) the confluence of the pulmonary veins (0,228); 1 cm above the diaphragm on the right (0,230). (19) at The end, by summing up the scores of each level, we obtained the values of Tot, Opac and Enf (highest score possible for each patient = 10). An example of obtaining these scores is shown in Figure 1. In the statistical analysis, we used the program Epi Info 6.04 and Statistica 5.01 (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). For description of the data, we used averages, standard deviations and frequencies. In the comparison of the readings, radiological, applied to the calculation of the coefficient of concordance. For comparison of the averages of the functional parameters among the various categories of HRCT was used analysis of variance (ANOVA). All continuous variables were analyzed for verification of the distribution normality according to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. They opted for the use of the method of parametric Pearson in the study of the correlations between the indices and functional scores ct. In this work, the results considered significant were those with p < 0.05. Results Of the 44 patients evaluated, 41 were men, with a mean age of 48.4 years. The average time of exposure to silica, and the time of removal from the exposure were 16.1 and 16.9 years, respectively. Among the professional activities, the most cited were the sand blasting (45,5%) and cutting (34.1 per cent). Other occupations cited were: stone cutter (6,8%), quarry (4,5%), foundry (4,5%), the manufacture of dental prostheses (2.3%), and esmerilador (2,3%). In the evaluation of chest radiography, 19 tests showed the technical quality of the level 1 and 25 for level 2. The distribution of the individuals in the categories of radiology of the ILO for small opacities occurred as follows: category 0 to 4 (9,1%); category 1-22 (50%); category 2-14 (31,8%); and category 3-4 (9,1%). As to the shape and size of small opacities, the radiographs were classified as: qq = 14; rq = 7; kp = 5; qr = 4; pp = 3; qp = 3; rr = 3; or qt = 1. For the classification of large opacities, it was found that 4 patients showed large opacity of The type (9,1%), 12 type B (27,3%), 7 of type C (15,9%) and 21 of them (47.7%) had not had this type of injury on chest radiography. The symbols most frequently observed were: ax (coalescence of small opacities, 22 cases); cn (calcification of small opacities, 14 cases); co (abnormalities of shape and/or size of the heart, 14 cases); and di (distortion of the structure intrathoracic, 12 cases). The analysis of the concordance interobserver for profusion of small opacities (categories 0, 1, 2 and 3) and type of large opacities (types 0, A, B and C) showed coefficients kappa of 0.31 (p < 0.001) and 0.75 (p < 0.001), respectively. The findings observed on HRCT were: micronodules in 44 cases (100%), with the identification of confluências in six tests; large opacities consistent with the diagnosis of fibrosis massive progressive (FMP) in 33 cases (75%); emphysema in 27 cases (61.4 per cent), and 21 of them of the type paracicatricial and 6 of the type panacinar (24 cases of emphysema, presented the association with the FMP); pleural thickening localized in 14 cases (31,8%), being 10 of them associated with FMP; and linfonodomegalias intratorácicas in 28 cases (63,6%). The comparisons between the classification of radiography and HRCT for the small and large opacities are shown in Tables 1 and 2. With respect to small opacities, there was agreement between the two methods in 56,8% of cases. In this sample, 4 patients classified in category 0 by radiography were reclassified in the category 1 by HRCT. For large opacities, the agreement between the two methods occurred in 70,5% of the examinations. While the x-ray diagnosed 23 cases of the FMP, the HRCT scan established the diagnosis in 33 patients. The average and standard deviation of the indices of pulmonary function, as well as the distribution of these values according to the classification of HRCT are presented in Table 3. For large opacities, we observe statistically significant on the measures of flow, Crs,dyn, and DLCO. With respect to the standard functional, 14 individuals presented disorder obstructive (mild in 13 cases and moderate in 1 case), 13 had disorder mixed (mild in 8 cases, moderate in 3 cases and severe in 2 cases). Eleven had disorder restrictive (mild in 8 cases, moderate in 2 cases and severe in 1 case) and 6 had rates spirometric volumes and static normal. In this study, 29 subjects showed reduction in the DLCO, and this is graded as mild in 15, moderate in 12 and severe in 2. In relation to the scores obtained in HRCT, the values of the averages of Tot, Opac and Enf were 3.7 and 3.3 and 1.5, respectively. The values of the coefficients of correlation between functional parameters and those obtained by the analysis tomographic are expressed in Table 4. For the score of opacities, the largest correlations were observed with measures of flow, diffusion, and Crs,dyn. Already the emphysema was correlated negatively with the measures of volume, diffusion, and flow. Discussion In the study of correlation morfofuncional, it is essential to eliminate the influence of any other factor, in addition to the one analyzed in lung function. In silicosis, almost all the work reported previously have included individuals, smokers and ex-smokers, as well as patients with a history of tuberculosis. (5,8-10) However, in this study, great care has been taken in the sense of removing the effects of tobacco smoke and consequences of tuberculosis in the functional tests. To this end, until reaching the optimal sample, it was necessary for the recruitment of patients from several centres of reference on silicosis in the State of Rio de Janeiro. By convention, the lesions silicóticas are evaluated using radiological guidance according to the international classification of forms of the ILO, which was created basically for the purpose of epidemiological. (1) However, its use for clinical diagnosis is questionable, particularly in relation to two aspects: the high inter-observer variability in the reading of x-rays, especially for the categories of low riot, and the fact that the classification of the ILO may underestimate the presence of lung disease. (16) In the present study, we observe a greater disagreement between the readers for the categories of small opacities. For large opacities, the variability inter-individual readings was low. These data are in agreement with other works, which also showed higher values of kappa for large opacities. (4,9,16-17) Despite these limitations, the chest radiograph continues to be the instrument for greater effectiveness in the follow-up of workers exposed to silica, since it presents low cost and low radiation dose. (2) Several studies were performed to establish the role of HRCT in early detection of small opacities. A study showed that 13 of the 32 individuals with a history of exposure to silica and x-ray normal had evidence of silicosis on HRCT. (16) A study conducted in our country, including 68 ex-miners, observed concordance of the results of radiography and HRCT in 55 cases and divergence in the 13, being that the HRCT added 5 new diagnoses of silicosis, and, on the other hand, away 8. (17) In the sample of the present study, 4 patients classified in category 0 by radiography were reclassified in the category 1 by HRCT, which reinforces the value of this last exam. As to the ability to detect large opacities, it is well established the superiority of CT relative to chest radiography. A study of HRCT of the 76 patients observed 10 cases of FMP, among the 26 that were classified as silicosis simple by the x-ray. (10) In the present study, HRCT, in relation to radiography, he added 10 new diagnoses of FMP, confirming the higher sensitivity of the method in the detection of complicated silicosis. Another interesting data is the detection of emphysema, which was diagnosed in 27 patients (61.4 per cent of cases). Considering the fact the sample have been exclusively comprised of individuals, non-smokers, the finding of emphysema in this study, can only be attributed to the presence of the FMP, or from the silica dust. With respect to the HRCT, we observed pleural thickening in 31.8% of cases (all of them of the type located), unlike other work which, not excluding individuals with a history of tuberculosis (31% of the patients), we observed this abnormality in 58,2% of the cases, most of them being of type diffuse. (20) According to the authors, although there is the possibility of diffuse pleural thickening cause functional impairment and restrictive, the clinical importance of this finding in silicosis is still uncertain. (20) With respect to lung function, we observed that the disorder obstructive was quite frequent, having been diagnosed in 61.4 per cent of cases (obstructive + mixed). In silicosis, the limitation to the airway flow is caused by various factors, such as the broncoestenoses secondary to fibrosis peribronquiolar, the presence of linfonodomegalias and the existence of emphysema centroacinar. (10,21) In the present study, however, it is possible that the large opacities and emphysema paracicatricial associated to them are the main mechanisms responsible for the phenomenon obtrusive, since 75% of the patients had FMP in HRCT. These masses of FMP, formed by agglomerates of nodules silicóticos, may distort the lung parenchyma normal, and determine the increase in irregular air spaces adjacent, which, ultimately, limits the flow of the lung. (10,22,23,24) As to the comparison of the averages of lung function between the different categories of HRCT, we note that, for small opacities, there was no significant difference of any parameter functional isolated with the progression of the categories assessed; agree with another study. This reinforces the notion that micronodules detected by HRCT does not influence, per se, the functional deterioration. (15) However, for large opacities, we observe the progressive decrease in the values of DLCO, Crs,dyn and airflow with the advancement of classification. These findings are in agreement with other works, which also showed higher correlation of functional impairment with the degree of large opacities. (5,9-10,23) Thus, the presence of these lesions in HRCT can be used as an important indicator of the severity of the disease. (9,10,25) In the sample studied, as well as in work previously published, the Opac was correlated negatively with the reduction of DLCO. (3,5,10,23) Some researchers have attributed this association to the presence of the FMP, once these large masses of fibrosis, with the advance of the disease tend to contract. This determines the appearance of emphysema paracicatricial and decrease of the area available for gas exchange, which reduces the extent of diffusion of the lung. (5,10,23) The analysis of the association obtained between the Opac and Crs,dyn is interesting, since, at our knowledge, there is no study in the literature correlating the measures of compliance with the findings of HRCT. The Crs,dyn represents, in practice, the ease with which the respiratory system, including the lungs and the chest wall, reaches for the CPT. (26) In complicated silicosis, the intensification of the involvement pleropulmonar justifies its reduction. Thus, once the measurement is done through non-invasive, Crs,dyn, could become, in the future, the more a parameter is functional in the follow-up of silicosis. (27) Furthermore, our results indicate that the deterioration of pulmonary function in individuals silicóticos, non-smokers, it is associated with the extent of the structural changes in a sample with a predominance of large opacities (75% of the individuals). As in previous work, we observed significant correlations between the Enf and the measurements of flow, volume and diffusion. However, the correlation coefficients were slightly lower than those achieved by other authors, who have used the population of smokers in your samples. (5,8-10,23) So, once again, the explanation rests on the smoke, that is known to reduce the values of flow and diffusion. It is pertinent to a critical analysis of the results of the present study and its limitations. In the work history, it was not quantified the dose or charge of exposure, which would be interesting for the better understanding of the correlations morfofuncionais. Another limitation is that, in the reading of the HRCT, has not been evaluated, the coefficient of concordance. Thus, the interpretation of the ct scan findings but, of consensus, may lead to a possible acceptance by the readers less experienced read more experienced, thus constituting a methodological bias. In conclusion, our study shows that the performance of HRCT in the diagnosis of silicosis, it is superior to the chest radiograph, both in the early detection of the early stages of the disease and in the identification of the FMP. 