OBJECTIVE. Assess the value of CT in the diagnosis of lesions of the spine and cervical cord in blunt trauma. METHODS. Review of blunt trauma of records seen from January 2006 to December 2008. The following data were analyzed: epidemiological, trauma mechanism, transport of victims to the hospital, in-hospital care, indication criteria for CT, diagnosis, treatment, and evolution of the victims in the study. The victims were distributed into two groups: Group I - no cervical spine injury; Group II - with cervical spine injury. RESULTS. the medical records of 3,101 victims were analyzed. Computed tomography was performed in 1572 (51%) patients, was observed male predominance among the victims (79%) with a mean age of 38.53 years in group I and 37.60 years in Group II. The distribution of trauma mechanisms was similar in both groups. Lesions found: 53 fractures, vertebral listeses eight eight spinal cord injuries. The consequences included: three paraplegia, quadriplegia five-eight sequelae of brain injury. In Group II there were seven deaths in Group I 240. The average length of hospital stay was 11 days for Group I and 26.2 days for Group II. CONCLUSION. A CT scan of the cervical spine in blunt trauma was effective in spine injuries identification and cervical cord. So, despite the cost of cervical CT, and low incidence of injuries she identifiable, its indication based on the usual criteria seems justified. Keywords: Spine / injuries. Spinal injuries. Spinal column.     INTRODUCTION Traumatic injuries account for more than 3.2 million deaths and more than 312 million injuries annually across the mundo1-3. In the United States of America (USA) more than 60 million people, most aged up to 40 years, are victims of traumatic injuries every year. For every injury death occur 19 hospital admissions, 233 consultations in emergencies and 450 medical consultations related to trauma1,3,4. Also in the US, every year 7,800 people (32 million) suffer spinal cord injury by spinal trauma, cervical location in almost half (48.7%) of these vítimas5. In Europe, trauma is also a leading cause of death in people 40 years old 3.6. Thus, in health, trauma has been focused increasingly frequent studies, and investment in both the developed and the in desenvolvimento7. Traumatic injury of the cervical spinal cord is a highly worrying problem in patient care traumatized all over the world due to the high risk of death and serious sequelae that result in serious permanent limitations both physical and social and professional standing. Entail, in addition, large expenditures of health systems, both with prolonged hospitalization and with the treatment, which usually lasts for several anos5,8. In addition to medical treatment, economic and social costs resulting from cervical spinal injuries are enormous, because up to 85% of victims who resist the first 24 hours after trauma survive for more than 10 years 3, and are in the productive age group, suffer great reduced productivity due to prolonged sick leave, early retirement, and unemployment 2,5,8-10. Hence the great importance of early and accurate diagnosis of spinal injury and cervical cord trauma victims contuso11,12. Several diagnostic methods are used to identify such injuries from physical examination to test for more sophisticated imaging, such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 5,8,12, and CT the most used feature, allowing determine the presence or absence of lesions of the spine or cervical spine in most cases 11,12. Like all diagnostic methods, CT has limitations, has its cost, and its indication criteria are not strictly accurate and may lead the physician to indicate it unnecessarily or fail to display it, damaging the accurate diagnosis of an injury column or cervical cord 9. A set of criteria for cervical spine CT indication was defined in a study that included 21 centers of American trauma evaluating 36,069 victims of trauma, and the results of the study revealed that, with the use of criteria, CT had a sensitivity of 99% and negative predictive value of 99.8% in the diagnosis of cervical spine injuries 12. In this context, the objective of this study is to evaluate the importance of computed tomography (CT) in the diagnosis of cervical spine injury and cervical cord in blunt trauma victims hospitalized in a university hospital in a developing country.   METHODS This retrospective study was conducted at Emergency Surgery Service of the Division of Clinical Surgery III Hospital Central Institute of the Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, and was the analysis of the records of blunt trauma victims who were assisted this service in the period from 01/01/2006 to 31/12/2008. For this analysis, a form to collect the following data was prepared: epidemiological, trauma mechanism, transport of victims to the hospital, in-hospital care, CT indication criteria, diagnosis, treatment, and evolution of the victims in the study. The cervical CT indication criteria included neck pain, presence of neurological deficit, the level of consciousness demotion, alcohol intoxication and other illicit drugs and increased tension in the muscles of the neck, defined as the presence of pain, either during palpation cervical muscles in the posterior midline of the neck, or pain reported by the patient in this region when he moved his neck. The three scores trauma employed in this study to quantify the severity of each trauma victims in the emergency room were: 1) the ISS (Injury Severity Score), an anatomical score obtained by summing the squares of the most serious injuries among the three regions of body most severely affected; 2) RTS (Revised Trauma Score), a physiological score obtained by summing the values ​​previously assigned in a C code (from zero to 4), and SAP (systolic blood pressure - systolic blood pressure), RR (respiratory rate - often respiratory ), and GCS (Glasgow coma score - Glasgow coma scale), and then multiplied by specific coefficients in this formula: RTS = 0.7326 x PAS (c) + 0.2908 x FR (c) + 0.9368 x GCS; 3) TRISS (Trauma and Injury Severity Score), which aims to estimate the likelihood of patient survival and is a mixed score that incorporates the age of the patient, the RTS and ISS as well as the use of a complex statistical via multiple logistic regression analysis where the values ​​derived from Major Trauma Outcome Study (MTOS) are employed. The GCS (Glasgow coma score - Glasgow coma scale) is incorporated in the formula of RTS and is a physiological index that evaluates the neurological pattern of trauma victims, and expressed in values ​​ranging from three (deep coma) to 15 (normal) . For statistical purposes, the medical records of 1,572 victims of trauma who underwent cervical spine CT scans were divided into two groups: Group I including records of victims who had injuries in the cervical spine CT, and Group II including records of victims showed that these lesions. CT scans of all the victims were evaluated and their reports made by experienced radiologists in conjunction with surgeons at our institution. For statistical analysis we used the test of likelihood ratio (Shapiro-Wilk W test 13), followed by the comparison of the groups using the Kruskal-Wallis14 test and multiple comparisons non-parametric by Dunn14 test between the groups, to identify differences between groups I and II. In the comparisons, we adopted the significance level of 5% 14.   RESULTS The medical records of 3,101 victims of blunt trauma were analyzed, having found that the CT of the cervical spine was indicated in the presence of at least one of the mentioned criteria. The data included age, sex, length of stay, ICU stay, presence of associated injuries, admission to the victim's severity (assessed by GCS, RTS, ISS and TRISS), injury findings column / cord cervical CT, presence of sequelae and mortality. The results showed that the cervical spine CT was performed in 1572 (51%) of the victims, which is in 51 (3.2%) of them were diagnosed cervical spine injury, whether bone, ligament or spinal cord. It was found that, regardless of the mechanism of injury, type of transport to our service, the victims who underwent cervical CT, did not change significantly. The main results are shown in Tables 1 to 5, and were analyzed focusing on the role of CT diagnosis, epidemiological data of victims and mortality observed in this population. In Group I: we found 1,521 victims and Group II: 51 victims .. There was no significant difference between the average age of victims of group I (38.53 years) compared to Group II (37.60 years). In both groups there was a predominance of young adults, 21-40 years of age (Table 1). There was a predominance (79%) of male victims both in Group I and Group II. The severity of the injury (ISS, RTS, TRISS) in Group II was higher than in group I (p < 0.001, Table 2). Group II did not differ from Group I and the distribution of victims in trauma mechanisms: roadkill, autos collisions, motorcycle accidents and falls from a height (Table 3). It was observed that 42.5% of victims of Group I presented, initial assessment, traumatic brain injury manifestation (TEC) moderate or severe (GCS 3-12), and that the 51 victims of Group II such incidence was 55%. The incidence of severe TBI (GCS 3-8) was 31% in Group I and 45% in Group II (Table 4), thus characterizing an association of severe TBI presence with the occurrence of injury to the cervical spine ( p < 0.001). In Group II 18 victims had more than one lesion column and / or cervical cord. Lesions of the column included 53 fractures [seven C1 10 C2 (including five odontoid process), four C3 eight C4 five C5 seven C6 and 12 C7), eight cases of spinal olisthesis. The cord injuries totaled eight. All 51 victims of Group II were also brain injury, and several of them had other associated lesions (Table 5). Of the 51 victims, eight had spinal cord injury who developed sequelae (three paraplegia and quadriplegia five); 36 survived without sequelae of spinal cord injury, but eight had sequelae of brain injury; seven of the 51 victims died. The average length of stay was 11 days for Group I and 26.2 days for Group II. (P = 0.025). The overall mortality rate in the amount of blunt trauma victims studied (16% = 495/3101) did not differ (p > 0.05) from that observed in the 1,572 victims submitted to cervical CT (16%). The mortality observed in victims of group I (15.8%) did not differ from that in group II [14%; (P = 0.990)].   DISCUSSION With recent technological advances, such as multislice computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), many traumatic injuries of the spine, which until a few decades often were not even suspected, are currently identified with segurança5,12. The data reported by the National Spinal Cord Injury Association Resource Center 5, using the above criteria for cervical CT indication showed that about 3% of blunt trauma victims who are undergoing cervical spine CT have some of the spinal cord injury (not necessarily cervical) as fracture or dislocation, and 1% of these victims have spinal cord injury, this rate probably underestimated due to deaths at the accident site 5. In this study, the use of such criteria, revealed an incidence of 1.64% (51 / 3,101) of injury to the cervical spine in the total population of blunt trauma, and in 1572 underwent cervical spine CT such incidence was 3.2% (51 / 1,572) of these, eight had cervical spinal cord injury. Thus, the indication criteria for CT were effective in detecting lesions in the cervical spine, with an incidence of similar injuries to those reported in more numerous case series conducted in developed countries, and the small number of cases of spinal cord injury found in this study does not allow a statistical comparison with the data of literatura5,12,15. The mechanism of injury in lesions most commonly reported cervical spine is represented by accidents involving motor vehicles, with 44% of cases, followed by violence / aggression (24%), falls (22%), sports activities (8 %) and other causes (2%) 5.16. In the present study, we observed high incidence of traffic accidents, with 74.4% involving motor vehicles (23.5% of pedestrian accidents, 35.3% of collisions of cars and 15.6% of motorcycle accidents), followed it falls from a height with 15.6%. (Table 3). Similarly to what happens in the literature, we observed in this study high prevalence of accidents involving motor vehicles, fitting to mention the participation of accidents involving motorcycles is increasing in our country in recent years. Among the victims of injury in the cervical spine, in this study, there was a predominance of young adult males, these data comparable to other studies15. The literature consulted mentions the existence of an association between cervical spine injuries and traumatic brain injury (TBI). Indeed, in this study we found an association of 100% between injuries of the cervical spine and TCE. Furthermore, the literature reports an average incidence of 50% of injuries to other organs associated with the column cervical12,16 injuries, and in this study, there was an association between cervical spine injury and other organ damage in 100% of cases . We also found that the severity of the victims (assessed by ISS, RTS and TRISS), was higher among those who had cervical lesion on CT. Both in this, as in other reports, the severity of lesions in other organs has not been specifically evaluated. Considering the increasing availability of CT as a diagnostic tool, the results of this study based on CT indication criteria in the diagnosis of cervical spine injury may contribute to the improvement of care of trauma. The data from our study appear consistent with those of the most numerous and recent anecdotal literature on various aspects considered relevant, including epidemiological characteristics of the victims, trauma mechanisms, and cervical spine injury diagnoses obtained. In summary, the results of this study suggest that CT of the cervical spine is an effective diagnostic resource in lesion identification of the cervical spine in its various types, as well as spinal cord injuries in blunt trauma victims, with comparable results to those reported in studies from developed countries. So, despite the cost of cervical CT, and low incidence of injuries she identifiable in blunt trauma, the indication based on the usual criteria seems justified.   