OBJECTIVE. To assess the value of computed tomohraphy (CT) in the diagnosis of the spine injuries and cervical cord in blunt trauma. METHODS. Review of blunt trauma of records seen from January 2006 to December 2008. The following data were analyzed: epidemiological, trauma mechanism, the victims'transport to the hospital, in-hospital care, indication criteria for the CT, diagnosis, treatment, and the evolution of the victims in the study. The victims were distributed into two groups: Group I - no cervical spine injury; Group II - with cervical spine injury. RESULTS. The medical records of 3,101 victims were analyzed. Computed tomography was performed in 1572 in (51%) patients, male predominance among the victims (79%) with a mean age of 38.53 years in group I and 37.60 years in Group II was observed. The distribution of trauma mechanisms was similar in both groups. Lesions found: 53 fractures, vertebral listeses eight eight spinal cord injuries. The consequences included: three paraplegia, quadriplegia five-eight sequelae of brain injury. In Group II there were seven deaths, and 240 in Group I. The average length of the hospital stay was of 11 days for Group I and 26.2 days for Group II. CONCLUSION. A CT scan of the cervical spine in blunt trauma was effective in spine injurie's identification and cervical cord. That way, despite the cost of cervical CT, and low incidence of injuries by it identifiable, its indication based on the usual criteria seems justified. Keywords: Spine/injuries. Spinal injuries. Spinal column.     INTRODUCTION Traumatic injuries are account for more than 3.2 million deaths and more than 312 million injuries annually across the mundo1-3. In the United States of America (USA) more than 60 million people, most aged up to 40 years, are victims of traumatic injuries every year. For every injury death, 19 hospital admissions occur, 233 consultations in emergencies and 450 medical consultations related to trauma1,3,4. Also in the US, annualy 7,800 people (32 million) suffer from spinal cord injury by spinal trauma, cervical location in almost half (48.7%) of these vítims5. In Europe, the trauma is also a leading cause of death in people till 40 years of age 3.6. Thus, in health, trauma has been the focus of increasingly frequent studies, and of investment in both the developed and the in develeopment7 countries. Traumatic injury of the cervical spinal cord is a highly worrying problem in the care of the traumatized patient all over the world due to the high risk of death and serious sequelae that result in serious permanent limitations both physical and social and professional standing. Entail, in addition, large expenditures of health systems, both with prolonged hospitalization and with the treatment, which usually lasts for several anos5,8. In addition to medical treatment, economic and social costs resulting from cervical spinal injuries are huge, because up to 85% of the victims who resist the first 24 hours after trauma survive for more than 10 years 3, and by being in the productive age group, they suffer a big reduced productivity due to prolonged sick leave, early retirement, and unemployment 2,5,8-10. Hence the great importance of early and accurate diagnosis of spinal injury and cervical cord trauma victims contuso11,12. Several diagnostic methods are used to identify such injuries since the physical examination until the more sophisticated imaging test, such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 5,8,12, and CT the most used feature, allowing determine the presence or absence of injuries of the spine or cervical spine in most cases 11,12. Like all diagnostic methods, CT has limitations, has its cost, and its indication criteria is not strictly accurate and may lead the physician to indicate it unnecessarily or fail to display it, damaging the accurate diagnosis of an injury column or cervical cord 9. A set of criteria for cervical spine CT indication was defined in a study that included 21 centers of American trauma evaluating 36,069 victims of trauma, and the results of the study revealed that, with the use of criteria, CT had a sensitivity of 99% and a negative predictive value of 99.8% in the diagnosis of cervical spine injuries 12. In this context, the objective of this study is to evaluate the importance of computed tomography (CT) in the diagnosis of cervical spine injury and cervical cord in blunt trauma victims hospitalized in a university hospital in a developing country.   METHODS This retrospective study was conducted at the Emergency Surgery Service of the Division of Clinical Surgery III Hospital Central Institute of the Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, and it consisted on the analysis of the records of blunt trauma victims who were assisted in this service in the period from 01/01/2006 to 31/12/2008. For that analysis, a form to collect the following data was prepared: epidemiological, trauma mechanism, transport of victims to the hospital, in-hospital care, CT indication criteria, diagnosis, treatment, and the evolution of the victims in the study. The cervical CT indication criteria included neck pain, the presence of neurological deficit, the level of consciousness demotion, alcohol intoxication and other illicit drugs and increased tension in the muscles of the neck, defined as the presence of pain, either during palpation cervical muscles in the posterior midline of the neck, or pain reported by the patient in this region when he moved his neck. The three scores trauma employed in this study to quantify the severity of each trauma victims in the emergency room were: 1) the ISS (Injury Severity Score), an anatomical score obtained by summing the squares of the most serious injuries among the three regions of body most severely affected; 2) RTS (Revised Trauma Score), a physiological score obtained by summing the values previously assigned in a C code (from zero to 4), and SAP (systolic blood pressure - systolic blood pressure), RR (respiratory rate - often respiratory), and GCS (Glasgow coma score - Glasgow coma scale), and then multiplied by specific coefficients in this formula: RTS = 0.7326 x PAS (c) + 0.2908 x FR (c) + 0.9368 x GCS; 3) TRISS (Trauma and Injury Severity Score), which aims to estimate the likelihood of patient survival and is a mixed score that incorporates the age of the patient, the RTS and ISS as well as the use of a complex statistical via multiple logistic regression analysis where the values derived from Major Trauma Outcome Study (MTOS) are employed. The GCS (Glasgow coma score - Glasgow coma scale) is incorporated in the formula of RTS and is a physiological index that evaluates the neurological pattern of trauma victims, being expressed in values ranging from three (deep coma) to 15 (normal). For statistical purposes, the medical records of 1,572 victims of trauma who underwent cervical spine CT scans were divided into two groups: Group I including records of victims who had injuries in the cervical spine CT, and Group II including records of victims that presented these injuries. CT scans of all the victims were evaluated and their reports were made by experienced radiologists in conjunction with surgeons at our institution. For statistical analysis we used the likelihood ratio (Shapiro-Wilk W test 13) test, followed by the comparison of the groups using the Kruskal-Wallis14 test and multiple comparisons non-parametric by Dunn14 test between the groups, to identify differences between groups I and II. In the comparisons, we adopted the significance level of 5% 14.   RESULTS The medical records of 3,101 victims of blunt trauma were analyzed, being found that the CT of the cervical spine was indicated in the presence of at least one of the mentioned criteria. The data included age, sex, length of stay, ICU stay, the presence of associated injuries, admission to the victim's severity (assessed by GCS, RTS, ISS and TRISS), injury findings column/cord cervical CT, the presence of sequelae and mortality. The results showed that the cervical spine CT was performed in 1572 (51%) of the victims, being that 51 (3.2%) of them were diagnosed with cervical spine injury, whether bone, ligament or spinal cord. It was verified that, regardless of the mechanism of injury, the type of transport to our service, the victims who underwent cervical CT, showed no significant variation. The main results are shown in Tables 1 to 5, and they were analyzed focusing on the role of the CT diagnosis, epidemiological data of victims and mortality observed in this population. In Group I: we found 1,521 victims and in Group II: 51 victims.. There was no significant difference between the average age of the victims of group I (38.53 years) compared to Group II (37.60 years). In both groups there was a predominance of young adults, 21-40 years of age (Table 1). There was a predominance (79%) of male victims both in Group I and Group II. The severity of the injury (ISS, RTS, TRISS) in Group II was higher than in Group I (p < 0.001, Table 2). Group II did not differ from Group I regarding the distribution of victims in trauma mechanisms: trampling, car crashes, motorcycle accidents and falls from height (Table 3). It was observed that 42.5% of the victims of Group I presented, at the initial assessment, manifestation of traumatic brain injury (TBI) moderate or severe (GCS 3-12), and that in the 51 victims of Group II such incidence was 55%. The incidence of severe TBI (GCS 3-8) was 31% in Group I and 45% in Group II (Table 4), thus characterizing an association of severe TBI presence with the occurrence of injury to the cervical spine (p < 0.001). In Group II 18 victims had more than one injury column and/or cervical cord. The lesions of the column included 53 fractures [7 C1, 10 C2 (including five odontoid process), 4 C3, 8 C4, 5 C5, 7 C6 and 12 C7), eight cases of spinal olisthesis. The cord injuries summed eight. All 51 victims of Group II had also brain injury, and several of them had other associated injuries (Table 5). Of the 51 victims, eight had spinal cord injury that evolved to sequelae (three paraplegia and five quadriplegia); 36 survived without sequelae of spinal cord injury, but eight had sequelae of brain injury; seven of the 51 victims died. The average length of stay was 11 days for Group I and 26.2 days for Group II. (P = 0.025). The overall mortality rate in the amount of blunt trauma victims studied (16% = 495/3101) did not differ (p > 0.05) from that observed in the 1,572 victims submitted to cervical CT (16%). The mortality observed in victims of group I (15.8%) did not differ from that in group II [14%; (P = 0.990)].   DISCUSSION With recent technological advances, such as multislice computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), many traumatic injuries of the spine, which until a few decades were often not even suspected, are currently identified with security5,12. The data reported by the National Spinal Cord Injury Association Resource Center 5, using the above criteria for cervical CT indication showed that about 3% of blunt trauma victims who are undergoing cervical spine CT have some of the spinal cord injury (not necessarily cervical) as fracture or dislocation, and 1% of these victims have spinal cord injury, being this rate probably underestimated due to deaths at the accident site 5. In this study, the use of such criteria, revealed an incidence of 1.64% (51 / 3,101) of injury to the cervical spine in the total population of blunt trauma victims, being that in the 1572 who underwent cervical spine CT such incidence was of 3.2% (51 / 1,572), and of these, eight had cervical spinal cord injury. Thus, the indication criteria for CT were effective in detecting injuries in the cervical spine, with an incidence of similar injuries to those reported in more numerous case series conducted in developed countries, and the small number of cases of spinal cord injury found in this study does not allow a statistical comparison with the data of literatura5,12,15. The mechanism of injury in the most commonly reported cervical spine is represented by accidents involving motor vehicles, with 44% of cases, followed by violence / aggression (24%), falls (22%), sports activities (8 %) and other causes (2%) 5.16. In the current study, we observed a high incidence of traffic accidents, with 74.4% involving motor vehicles (23.5% of pedestrian accidents, 35.3% of collisions of cars and 15.6% of motorcycle accidents), followed by falls from a height of 15.6%. (Table 3). Similarly to what happens in the literature, we observed in this study high prevalence of accidents involving motor vehicles, fitting to mention the participation of accidents involving motorcycles is increasing in our country in recent years. Among the victims of injury in the cervical spine in this study, there was a predominance of young adult males, being these data comparable to the ones from other studies 15. The consulted literature mentions the existence of an association between cervical spine injuries and traumatic brain injury (TBI). Indeed, in this study we found an association of 100% between injuries of the cervical spine and TCE. Furthermore, the literature reports an average incidence of 50% of injuries to other organs associated with the column cervical12,16 injuries, and in this study, there was an association between cervical spine injury and other organ damage in 100% of cases. We also found that the severity of the victims (assessed by ISS, RTS and TRISS), was higher among those who had cervical lesion on CT. Both in this, as in other reports, the severity of the injuries in other organs was not specifically evaluated. Considering the increasing availability of the CT as a diagnostic tool, the results of this study based on the CT indication criteria in the diagnosis of cervical spine injury may contribute to the improvement of trauma care. The data from our study appear consistent with those of the most numerous and recent anecdotal literature on various aspects considered relevant, including epidemiological characteristics of the victims, trauma mechanisms, and cervical spine injury diagnoses obtained. In summary, the results of this study suggest that the cervical spine CT is an effective diagnostic resource in injury identification of the cervical spine in its various types, as well as spinal cord injuries in blunt trauma victims, with comparable results to those reported in studies from developed countries. That way, despite the cost of the cervical CT, and the low incidence of injuries identifiable by it in the blunt trauma, the indication based on the usual criteria seems justified.   