 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE. To assess the value of computed tomography in the diagnosis of lesions of the spine and spinal cord cervical in victims of trauma blunt. METHODS. Review of medical records of victims of trauma blunt met from January 2006 to December 2008. Were analyzed the following data: epidemiology, mechanism of trauma, transport of the victims to the hospital care intra-hospital care, indication criteria for CT, diagnosis, treatment, and evolution of the victims in the study. The victims were distributed into two groups: Group I - no lesion in the cervical spine; Group II - with injury to the cervical spine . RESULTS. Were analyzed the medical records of all 3.101 victims. The ct scan was indicated in 1.572 (51%) patients, it Was observed a predominance of male among the victims (79%), with an average age of 38,53 years in Group I and 37,60 years in the Group II. THE distribution of the mechanisms of trauma was similar in the two groups. Injuries found: 53 fractures, eight listeses vertebral and eight spinal cord injuries. The consequences included: three spastic paraplegia, five tetraplegias and eight sequelae of brain injury. In Group II occurred seven deaths in Group I 240. The average duration of hospital stay was 11 days for Group I and 26.2 days for the Group II. CONCLUSION. CT of the cervical spine in victims of trauma blunt has been effective in identifying lesions of the spine and spinal cord the cervical. So, despite the cost of CT cervical, and the low incidence of injuries for she is identifiable, the indication based on the usual criteria seems justified. Descriptors: spine/injuries. Injuries of the spinal column. Injuries of the spinal column. INTRODUCTION traumatic injuries are responsible for more than 3.2 million deaths and more than 312 million injuries a year throughout the world1-3. In the United States of America (USA) more than 60 million people, the majority of with age up to 40 years, are victims of traumatic injuries each year. For each death due to trauma occur 19 in hospital admissions, 233 queries in emergencies, and 450 medical consultations related to the trauma1,3,4. Also in the USA, annually 7.800 people (32 per million inhabitants) suffer from traumatic spinal cord injuries of vertebral column location cervical in almost half (48,7%) of these vítimas5. In Europe, the trauma is also the leading cause of death in persons up to 40 years of age to 3.6. With this, in the area of health, the trauma comes from being the focus of more and more frequent studies, and investments, both in developed countries as in desenvolvimento7. The trauma of the spinal cord cervical is a highly worrying in patient care traumatized all over the world, due to the high risk of death and severe sequelae which lead to serious limitations permanent, both physical and social and professional standing. Entail, in addition, large expenditures of health care systems, both with longer hospital stays and the treatment, which usually lasts for several anos5,8. In addition to medical treatment, the expense of the economic and social resulting from spinal cord injuries to the neck are huge, because up to 85% of victims who resist to the first 24 hours after the trauma surviving for more than 10 years of age3, and are in the age range of the productive, will suffer great reduction of the productivity due to absences prolonged labour, pensions, early, and unemployment 2,5,8-10. Dai stems from the great importance of early diagnosis and accurate lesions of the spine and spinal cord cervical spine in victims of trauma contuso11,12. Various diagnostic methods are used to identify such injuries, since physical examination to tests for image more sophisticated, such as computed tomography (CT) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 5,8,12, being the TC, the most used, allowing to characterize the presence or absence of injury of the spine or spinal cord cervical in most cases 11,12. As with all diagnostic methods, CT has limitations, has its cost, and its indication criteria are not strictly accurate and may lead the doctor to report it unnecessarily, or to fail to report it, to the detriment of accurate diagnosis of an injury to the spine or spinal cord cervical 9. A set of criteria for the indication for CT of the cervical spine was defined in a study that included 21 trauma centers north american evaluating 36.069 victims of trauma, and the results of the study revealed that, with the use of the criteria, the CT had sensitivity of 99% and the negative predictive value was 99.8% in the diagnosis of injuries of the cervical spine 12. In this context, the objective of this study is to assess the importance of computed tomography (CT) cervical spine in the diagnosis of injury of the spine and spinal cord cervical in victims of trauma blunt admitted to a university hospital in a developing country. METHODS THE present retrospective study was conducted at the department of Emergency Surgery of the Division of Surgical Clinic III of the Central Institute of Hospital das Clínicas, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, and consisted in the analysis of medical records of victims of trauma blunt that were answered on this Service in the period from 01/01/2006 to 31/12/2008. For such analysis, was prepared a sheet for the collection of the following data: epidemiology, mechanism of trauma, transport of the victims to the hospital care intra-hospital care, indication criteria for CT, diagnosis, treatment, and evolution of the victims in the study. The criteria of indication for CT cervical spine include neck pain, presence of deficit neurological, lowering the level of consciousness, alcohol intoxication and other illegal drugs, and the increased tension in the musculature of the cervical region, defined as the presence of pain during palpation of the musculature cervical spine in the midline back of the neck, or referred pain by the patient in the region when he traveled to the neck. The three scores of trauma employed in this study to quantify the severity of each victim of trauma in emergency room were: 1) the ISS (Injury Severity Score), a score anatomical obtained by the sum of the squares of the more serious injuries among the three regions of the body most severely affected; 2) the RTS (Revised Trauma Score), a score of physiological obtained by the sum of the values previously assigned in a c code (from zero to 4), such as SAP (systolic arterial pressure - systolic arterial pressure), RR (respiratory rate - frequency respiratory), and GCS (Glasgow coma score - the Glasgow coma scale), and then multiplied by coefficients specific to this formula: RTS = 0,7326 x PAS(c) + 0.2908 x FR(c) + 0,9368 x GCS; 3) the TRISS (Trauma and Injury Severity Score), which aims to estimate the probability of survival of the patient, and is a score mixed that incorporates the patient's age, the RTS and the ISS, as well as the use of a statistical complex through multiple logistic regression analyses where the values derived from the Major Trauma Outcomes Study (MTOS) are employed. The GCS (Glasgow coma score - the Glasgow coma scale) is incorporated in the formula of the RTS, and is an index of the physiological, which assesses the neurological pattern of victims of trauma, and is expressed in values ranging from three (deep coma) to 15 (normal). For statistical purposes, the medical records of 1.572 victims of trauma who were submitted to CT scan of cervical spine were divided into two groups: Group I including the medical records of the victims who did not have lesions in the cervical spine CT, and Group II including the medical records of the victims who reported these injuries. The TC of all the victims were evaluated and their reports made by radiologists experienced in conjunction with surgeons from our institution. For statistical analysis we used the test of reason verossimilhanças (Shapiro-Wilk W Test 13), followed by the comparison of the groups by the test Kruskal-Wallis14, and the multiple comparisons non-parametric test of Dunn14 between the groups, in order to identify differences between groups I and II. In the comparisons, we adopted the significance level of 5% 14. RESULTS Were analyzed the medical records of all 3.101 victims of trauma blunt, having found that CT of the cervical spine was indicated in the presence of at least one of the criteria mentioned. The data obtained included: age, sex, time of hospitalization, hospitalization in an ICU, presence of associated lesions, the severity of the victim to admission (measured by GCS, RTS, ISS and TRISS), the findings of lesions in the spine/spinal cord cervical CT, the presence of sequelae, and mortality. The results showed that CT of the cervical spine was performed in 1.572 (51%) of the victims, and in 51 (3,2%) of them were diagnosed with injury of the cervical spine, whether bony, ligamentous, or spinal cord. It was found that, regardless of the mechanism of trauma, the type of transport for our service, of the victims who were subjected to CT cervical showed no significant variation. The main results are presented in tables 1 to 5, and were analyzed focusing on the role diagnostic CT scan, the epidemiological data of victims and the mortality observed in the population studied. In Group I: we find 1.521 victims and in Group II: 51 victims.. there was No significant difference between the average age of the victims of the group I (38,53 years) in comparison to Group II (37,60 years). In both groups there was a predominance of young adults, 21 to 40 years of age (Table1). It was observed the predominance (79%) of male victims both in Group I and in Group II. The severity of trauma (ISS, RTS, TRISS) in Group II was higher than in Group I (p<0.001, Table 2). The Group II differed from Group I as regards the distribution of victims in the mechanisms of trauma :pedestrian accidents, collisions of autos, accidents, motorcycles, falls from a height (Table 3). It was observed that 42.5 per cent of the victims of the Group I have presented, from the initial evaluation, the manifestation of trauma of the skull and the brain (TBI) moderate or severe (GCS 3 to 12), and that in the 51 victims of the Group II such incidence was 55%. Already the incidence of TEC severe (GCS 3 to 8) was 31% in Group I and 45% in Group II (Table 4), thus characterizing an association of the presence of TEC serious with the occurrence of injury to the cervical spine (p<0.001). In Group II 18 victims had more than one lesion in the spine and/or spinal cord cervical. The lesions of the column included 53 fractures [seven of C1, 10 C2 (including five of the process odontóide), four C3, eight C4, five, C5, the seven of C6-12, C7), eight cases of listese spine. The lesions of the cord amounted to eight. All 51 victims of Group II also had the brain injury, and several of them had other associated lesions (Table 5). Of the 51 victims, eight had spinal cord injury that has evolved with the sequel (three paraplegia, and five tetraplegia); 36 survived without sequelae of spinal cord injury, but eight were sequelae of brain injury; seven of the 51 casualties were the death. The mean hospital stay was 11 days for Group I and 26.2 days for the Group II. (p=0.025). The overall mortality rate observed in the total number of victims of trauma blunt studied (16% = 495/3.101) did not differ (p>0.05) from that observed in 1.572 victims submitted to the CT cervical (16%). The mortality observed in the victims of the group I (15.8 percent) did not differ from that observed in group II [14%; (p = 0,990)]. DISCUSSION With recent technological advances, such as computed tomography multislice and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), many traumatic injuries of the spinal column, which until only a few decades often, nor were they suspected, are currently identified with segurança5,12. The data reported by the National Spinal Cord Injury Association Resource Center 5, using the above mentioned criteria, indication for CT cervical showed that approximately 3% of the victims of trauma blunt that are submitted to the CT of the cervical spine have an injury of the spinal column (not necessarily cervical) as fracture or displacement, and 1% of casualties have spinal injury, rate is probably underestimated due to the deaths at the accident site 5. In the present study, the use of such criteria, revealed an incidence of 1.64% (51/3.101) of lesions in the cervical spine in the total population of victims of trauma blunt, and in 1.572 submitted to the CT of the cervical spine such incidence was 3.2%, (51/1.572), of these, eight had spinal cord injury cervical. Thus, the indication criteria for CT have shown to be effective in the detection of lesions in the cervical spine, with an incidence of lesions similar to those reported in anecdotal more numerous carried out in developed countries, the small number of cases of spinal cord injury found in the present study does not allow comparing the statistical with the data of the literatura5,12,15. The mechanism of trauma in the lesions of the cervical spine most commonly reported is represented by accidents involving motor vehicles, with 44% of the cases, followed by violence/aggression (24%), falls (22%), sports activities (8%), and other causes (2%)5,16. In the present study, we observed a high incidence of traffic accidents, with 74,4% involving motor vehicles (23.5% of deaths, 35,3% of collisions of autos and 15.6% of accidents motociclísticos), followed by falls from a height with 15.6%. (Table 3). Similarly to what occurs in the literature reviewed, we observed in this study, predominance of accidents involving motor vehicles, and shall mention the participation of the accidents involving motorcycles that is growing in our midst in the last few years. Among the victims of injury in the cervical spine, in this study, there was a predominance of young adult males, data on these comparable with those of other studies15. The literature consulted mentions the existence of an association between lesions of the cervical spine and trauma of the skull and the brain (TEC). In fact, in this study, we found an association of 100% in lesions of the cervical spine and TEC. Moreover, the literature reports an average incidence of 50% to lesions of other organs associated with the lesions of the column cervical12,16, and in the present study, an association was observed between injury to the cervical spine and injuries of other organs in 100% of cases. We've also seen that the severity of the victims (assessed by the ISS, RTS and TRISS), was higher among those who had injury to the cervical CT. Both in this, as in other reports, the severity of the lesions in other organs has not been specifically evaluated. Considering the increasing availability of CT as a diagnostic feature, the results of the present study based on the criteria of indication of CT in the diagnosis of injury of the cervical spine may contribute to the enhancement of care of trauma. The data of our study seem consistent with those of the case-by-case more numerous and recent literature on several aspects considered relevant, including epidemiologic features of victims, mechanisms of trauma, and the diagnosis of injury of the cervical spine obtained. In summary, the results of the present study suggest that computed tomography of the cervical spine is a feature that is diagnostic is effective in identifying lesions of the cervical spine, in their various types, as well as spinal cord injuries, in victims of trauma blunt, with results comparable to those reported in studies from developed countries. So, despite the cost of CT cervical, and the low incidence of injuries she identifiable trauma blunt, the indication based on the usual criteria seems justified. 