SUMMARY We report the case of the dynamic and quantitative perfusion CT multi-detector dual X-ray source in a 44-year-old patient with a previous diagnosis of coronary artery disease. The tomography showed quantitative myocardial perfusion deficit in the irrigated areas by arteries with significant stenosis confirmed by angiography and the coronary angiography. Computed tomography with dual X-ray source enabled the assessment perfusion and anatomical dynamics in a single study, during the evolutionary control of this patient. Keywords: Myocardial reperfusion, computed tomography, coronary disease, assessment.     Introduction The computed Tomography with Multiple detectors (MDCT) has revolutionized the arsenal diagnosis of Coronary Artery Disease (CAD), allowing noninvasive assessment of coronary anatomy, ventricular function, perfusion and viability miocárdicas1-4. There are few studies using MDCT for evaluation of Myocardial Perfusion (PM) 4-6, and in Brazil there is no report describing the dynamic and quantitative PM by MDCT. We describe the use of dynamic and quantitative perfusion performed using the equipment of second generation MDCT dual source of X-rays (SOMATOM Definition Flash, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany) in patients with previous history of CAD.   Case report Studied male patient of 44 years with prior heart attack three weeks ago, underwent angioplasty and stent implantation in arteries Anterior Descending (DA) and circumflex (Cx). Angioplasty of AD was considered unsuccessful and the stent Cx presented migration after its expansion. MDCT was indicated to evaluate late stent placement Cx and residual myocardial ischemia. Patient fasting were asked four hours for CT angiography and diet without xanthine 24 hours before performing the pharmacological stimulation. The procedure was detailed, the doubts clarified and, after that the informed consent form signed and approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee. The study protocol consisted of prospective and quantitative analysis of the PM, dynamically, followed by coronary luminal evaluation and the presence or absence of Highlight Tardio (RT) myocardial. The time for the acquisition of images has been planned after completion test for bolus contrast peak time of calculating the aorta, with a volume of 15 ml, followed by 50 ml serum at 6 ml /s. The pharmacological stress was made with dipyridamole injection at a dose of 0.56 mg /kg for four minutes, and the perfusion was performed two minutes after the end of the drug injection. The dynamic sequence started six seconds before the arrival of the contrast in the ascending aorta, with nine stages and total duration of 30 seconds. The acquisition was made with continuous table movement, coupled to the ECG. Data were acquired for 30 seconds through both tubes 100 kV, 0.28 rotating the 2nd time, 350 mAs, slice thickness of 0.6 mm and 73 mm anatomical coverage. The amount of iodinated contrast Optiray 350 (Ioversol 350 mg /ml, Mallinckrodt, USA) was injected 50 ml, followed by 50 mL of saline solution at 6 ml /s. The PM protocol was performed without complications. Following the acquisition of stress image, administer 480 mg of diluted aminophylline in 20 mL of saline to reverse the pharmacological stimulation. After the infusion, we administer metoprolol 15 mg EV to reduce the heart rate to 60 bpm. Maintained the electrocardiographic gating and using the acquisition to "pitch" 3.4 (mode "flash"), coronary anatomy images were acquired at 120 kV, rotation time of 0.28 seconds and 320 mAs cutting thickness 0.6 mm. RT evaluation was performed seven minutes after contrast injection, 100 kV, 0.28 rotating the 2nd time, 370 mAs, slice thickness of 0.6 mm and "pitch" of 3.4 ("flash" mode). The reconstruction of the perfusion images was conducted with thickness of 3 mm, 2 mm increments, filter B23 and temporal resolution of 75 ms. Data was collected at the end of systole (250 ms RR). The evaluation and quantification of PM were performed with processing software "Body Volume Perfusion CT" (Syngo VE36A, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany). Analyses of coronary anatomy and RT were made in workstation (Aquarius iNtuition ver.4.4 - Terarecon Inc - USA and Leonardo Circulation, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany) using multiplanar reformatting and curves. The patient reported no symptoms during injection of dipyridamole. PM of radiation doses from CT angiography and late enhancement were 8.2 mSv 1.0 mSv and 0.8 mSv, respectively, making a total dose of 10 mSv. In PM assessment using dipyridamole showed a deficit of PM inferoseptal and anterolateral. Quantitatively, the area without perfusion deficit (normal area) showed myocardial flow of 119 mL /100 mL /min total volume of 23 ml /100 ml (side wall), while areas with ischemia had flow of 52 ml /100 ml /min and volume of 11 mL /100 mL (inferoseptal wall) and 50 ml /100 ml /min and volume of 10 mL /100 mL (anterolateral wall) (fig. 1) (Figure 1). The angiography showed arteries with ectasia throughout extension, suggesting a possible arthritis. The DA had ecstasy, diffuse calcifications and severe lesion in the middle third after the stent (Fig. 2A). The Cx presented multiple calcified plaques, several ecstatic areas and stent in the middle third. The third marginal branch presented moderate /significant injury in the middle third. The stent was not adhered to the arterial wall and located in an enlarged portion (Figs. 2B). The right coronary artery (RCA) presented multiple calcified plaques and severe luminal narrowing in the middle third (Fig. 2C). The findings of CT angiography were similar to those found in coronary angiography, used as a reference. After seven minutes from coronary contrast injection was performed the evaluation of RT which did not reveal areas of myocardial fibrosis (fig. 3).   Discussion In this study, we report a new way of dynamic and quantitative evaluation of the PM using MDCT dual source of X-rays in 44 patients with previous history of CAD, where it was possible to detect areas of myocardial ischemia, coronary stenosis and preserved myocardial viability. Angiotomography associated with PM assessment allows us to make the diagnosis of coronary stenosis, ischemia detection and myocardial viability, fast, non-invasive and low radiation dose. Cury et al.4 using a scanner with 64 detectors demonstrated sensitivity and specificity (88.0% and 79.3%), comparable to the radionuclide (68.8% and 76.1%) with the PM evaluation dipiridamol4. In the literature there is a PM application of case report with adenosine using dual source CT scanner X-ray, showing a great association between coronary anatomy and flow miocárdico7. The advantage of using the dual-source acquisition is dynamic during the first pass of the contrast associated anatomy and RT with an acceptable dose of radiation. The PM studies through single source MDCT, whether 64 or more, to get a single phase for perfusion assessment with the anatomical information, whether during stress alone is associated with repouso4. The radiation dose of this report was 10 mSv, comparable to studies obtained with other equipment for anatomical evaluation. We emphasize the scarce literature using the second generation of CT scanners dual source Ray X1,8. The assessment of myocardial viability by tomography did not require additional infusion of contrast, as well as small increment of total radiation (0.8 mSv RT). The clinical and electrocardiographic picture was acute myocardial infarction with early rescue angioplasty, which eventually preserved considerable myocardial area. It was not possible to demonstrate the possible presence of subendocardial infarction by another method, such as magnetic resonance imaging, which would give more precise information of myocardial fibrosis, detected by CT. By MDCT dual source of X-rays, we evaluated the PM with dipyridamole and detect sharp decrease in myocardial blood flow in areas with severe stenosis when compared with normal areas. Moreover, the angiography showed significant stenosis and final positioning of the stent. This report confirms the prospect of using the MDCT as a diagnostic tool in patients in CAD research, allowing the evaluation of the coronary anatomy, myocardial perfusion and viability. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   