 SUMMARY we Report the case of perfusion dynamics and quantitative by multi-detector computed tomography dual X-Ray source in a patient of 44 years, previously diagnosed with coronary heart disease. The ct scan demonstrated quantitatively deficit of myocardial perfusion in territories irrigated by the arteries with stenosis significant as confirmed by angiotomografia and by coronary angiography. Computed tomography, dual X-Ray source allowed the evaluation of dynamic perfusion analysis and anatomical, in a single study, during the control of evolution of this patient. Key words: myocardial Reperfusion, ct scan, disease of the coronary arteries, evaluation. Introduction To Computed Tomography with Multi-Detector (MDCT) has revolutionised the arsenal the diagnosis of Coronary Artery Disease (cad), allowing evaluation in a non-invasive anatomy and coronary, ventricular function, perfusion and viability miocárdicas1-4. There are few studies using MDCT for evaluation of Myocardial Perfusion (MP)4-6, and in Brazil there is no report describing the PM dynamic and quantitative measurement by MDCT. We describe the use of perfusion dynamics and quantitative performed using the equipment of the second generation of MDCT dual source of X-Rays (SOMATOM Definition Flash, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany) in a patient with a prior history of CAD. Case report Studied a male patient of 44 years, with previous infarction three weeks ago, submitted to angioplasty and stent implantation in the arteries, the Descending Anterior (DA) and Circunflexa (Cx). The angioplasty of THE was considered as failure and the stent in the Cx presented migration after expansion. MDCT was indicated to assess the position late stent of the Cx and the research of myocardial ischemia residual. Were requested to the patient fasting for four hours to the angiotomografia and diet without xanthine 24 hours prior to the stimulation therapy. Were detailed the procedure, answered all questions and, after that, signed the term of informed consent approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institution. The protocol of the study was the prospective analysis and the quantitative of the PM, in a dynamic way, then the evaluation luminal coronary and the presence or absence of Enhancement Late (RT) myocardial. The time for the acquisition of the images was planned after the test bolus for the calculation of the time of the peak of the contrast in the aorta, with a volume of 15 mL, followed by 50 mL of serum to 6 mL/s. The pharmacological stress with injection of dipyridamole at a dose of 0.56 mg/kg, during four minutes, and the perfusion was performed two minutes after the end of the injection of the drug. The dynamic sequence began six seconds before the arrival of contrast in the ascending aorta, with nine phases and a total duration of 30 seconds. The acquisition was carried out with continuous movement of the table, coupled to the ECG. Data were acquired for 30 seconds through both tubes with 100 kV, rotation time of 0.28 seconds, 350 mAs, section thickness of 0.6 mm, and coverage of anatomical of 73 mm. The volume of iodinated contrast Optiray 350 (Ioversol 350 mg/mL-Mallinckrodt-USA) injected was of 50 mL, followed by 50 mL of saline at 6 mL/s. The protocol of PM was performed without complications. After the acquisition of the image stress, the husbanding of 480 mg of aminophylline diluted in 20 mL of saline to reverse the stimulation therapy. After the infusion, administer metoprolol 15 mg EV to reduce the heart rate to 60 bpm. Maintained the coupling eletrocardiográfico and using the acquisition with pitch of 3.4 (mode flash) images were acquired on the anatomy of the coronary with 120 kV, rotation time of 0.28 seconds, 320 but and section thickness of 0.6 mm. Evaluation of the RT was made seven minutes after injection of the contrast, with 100 kV, rotation time of 0.28 seconds, 370 mAs, section thickness of 0.6 mm and a pitch of 3.4 (mode, "flash"). The reconstruction of the images of perfusion was carried out with a thickness of 3 mm, increment 2 mm, filter B23 and temporal resolution of 75 ms. Data were collected at the end of systole (250 ms of the RR). The evaluation and quantification of the PM were carried out with the processing software "Body Volume Perfusion CT" (Syngo VE36A, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany). The analysis of the coronary anatomy and RT were made on workstation (Aquarius iNtuition see.4.4 - Terarecon Inc - USES and Leonardo Circulation, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany) using reformatações multiplanares and curves. The patient did not report symptoms during the injection of dipyridamole. The radiation doses of PM, angiotomografia and highlight late was 8.2 mSv, 1.0 mSv and 0.8 mSv, respectively, making a total dose of 10 mSv. In the evaluation of PM using dipyridamole was found deficit in PM ínfero-septal and anterior-lateral. Quantitatively, the area without the deficit of perfusion (area normal) presented flow myocardial of 119 mL/100 mL/min and total volume of 23 mL/100 mL (the side wall), while the areas with ischemia had a flow of 52 mL/100 mL/min and volume of 11 mL/100 mL (wall ínfero-septal) and 50 mL/100 mL/min and volume of 10 mL/100 mL (anterolateral wall) (fig. 1) (chart 1). The angiotomografia showed the arteries ectasias in the entire length, suggesting a possible arteritis. The presented ectasias, calcifications diffuse and serious injury in the middle third after the stent (fig. 2A). The Cx showed multiple calcified plaques, several areas ectásicas and the stent in the middle third. The third branch marginal had injury moderate/important in middle third. The stent was not attached to the artery wall and was located in a part enlarged (fig. 2B). The artery Coronary Right (CD) showed multiple calcified plaques and a reduction in luminal severe in the middle third (fig. 2C). The findings of the angiotomografia were similar to those found in the coronary angiography, used as a reference. Just seven minutes after the injection of contrast in the coronary it was carried out the evaluation of RT that showed areas of myocardial fibrosis (fig. 3). Discussion in This study, we report a new mode of dynamic assessment and quantitative measurement of PM using the MDCT dual-source X-Ray in a patient of 44 years old with a prior history of CHD, where it was possible to detect areas of myocardial ischemia, stenosis, coronary artery, and myocardial viability is preserved. The angiotomografia associated with the evaluation of the PM allows us to make the diagnosis of stenosis, coronary artery, detection of ischemia and viability, myocardial, fast, non-invasive and with low radiation dose. Cury and colleagues.4, using a ct scanner with 64 detectors have demonstrated sensitivity and specificity (88,0% and 79.3%), comparable to that of scintigraphy (to 68.8% and 76,1%) in the evaluation of PM with dipiridamol4. In the literature there is a report of the case of the application of the PM with adenosine using the ct scanner dual source X-Ray, showing a great association between the coronary anatomy and flow miocárdico7. The advantage of the use of dual sourcing is the acquisition dynamics during the first pass of the contrast, associated with the anatomy and RT, with an acceptable radiation dose. The studies of PM through the MDCT of a single source, be 64 or more, acquire a single stage for the evaluation of perfusion analysis, with the anatomic information, either during the stress alone, is associated with the repouso4. The radiation dose for this report was 10 mSv, which is comparable to studies obtained with other equipment for the evaluation of anatomical. We stress the scarce literature using the second generation ct scanner dual source Radius, X1,8. The assessment of myocardial viability by ct scan did not require the infusion of additional contrast, as well as a small increment of the total radiation (from 0.8 mSv to the RT). The clinical picture and eletrocardiográfico was acute myocardial infarction with angioplasty rescue early, which eventually has preserved considerable area myocardial. It was not possible to demonstrate the eventual presence of myocardial subendocárdico by another method, such as magnetic resonance imaging, which would give the most accurate information of myocardial fibrosis not detected by the tomography. Through the MDCT dual source of X-Rays, we evaluate the PM with dipyridamole and detected sharp decrease in the flow myocardial areas with severe stenosis, when compared with normal areas. In addition, the angiotomografia demonstrated stenosis significant and the final positioning of the stent. This report confirms the prospect of the use of MDCT as a diagnostic tool in patients undergoing investigation for cad, allowing for the evaluation of coronary anatomy, perfusion and viability myocardial. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 