SUMMARY CT angiography of coronary arteries (coronary CT angiography of) is an excellent non-invasive imaging method to evaluate coronary artery disease. Currently, the estimated effective radiation dose of coronary CT angiography can be reduced in the latest generation CT scanners with multiple detectors, such as the CT scanner with 320 rows of detectors (320-CT), without loss in diagnostic accuracy of coronary CT angiography. To further reduce the radiation dose, new iterative reconstruction algorithms have recently been introduced by various manufacturers of scanners, which are currently routinely used in this test. We present our initial experience in coronary CT angiography using the 320-CT and Adaptive Iterative Dose Reduction 3D (AIDR-3D). We also present the most common indications of this examination in the routine of the institution as well as the acquisition of protocols, CT angiography of coronary arteries with updates related to this new technique to reduce the radiation dose. We conclude that the radiation dose of coronary CT angiography can be reduced by following the principle of low the reasonable achievable (as low as reasonably achievable), combining the examination statement with well-documented techniques to reduce radiation dose, as the use of betablockers and reducing the kV, and the latest iterative reconstruction applications for reduction of radiation dose, as AIDR-3D. Keywords: Coronary angiography; Coronary artery disease; Multidetector computed tomography; Ionizing radiation; Control of exposure to radiation; image processing computer-assisted; myocardial ischemia; Diagnostic imaging; Imaging techniques cardiac synchronization; cardiac imaging techniques INTRODUCTION The role of the computerized tomography angiography (CT angiography) of the coronary arteries was established in recent guidelines of the American College of Cardiology / American Heart Association (ACC / AHA) as a noninvasive imaging method for the evaluation of coronary artery disease and some cardiovascular diseases (1). Currently, the estimated effective radiation dose of coronary CT angiography can be drastically reduced by means of last generation CT scanners, such as scanner with two X-ray tubes (DSCT) and the scanner 320 rows of detectors (320-CT) ( 2) without significant changes in the diagnostic accuracy of the image of the coronary (3). To optimize and further reduce the radiation dose, new reconstruction iterative algorithms have recently been introduced by various manufacturers of CT scanners (4), currently being used routinely in coronary CT angiography. This paper presents our first experience with coronary CT angiography in 320-CT using Adaptive Iterative Dose Reduction 3D (AIDR-3D). the indications of coronary CT angiography acquisition and protocols related to the reduction of radiation dose is described.   INDICATIONS FOR CORONARY OF CT angiography Each indication of coronary CT angiography requires a specific protocol for CT angiography, which can be greatly increased radiation dose. For example, protocols designed to evaluate patients undergoing coronary revascularization and CT angiography "to triple the emergency disposal" often require higher doses than in conventional coronary CT angiography (1). Most patients referred to our institution for performing coronary CT angiography presented as main indication previous history cardiovascular tests with conflicting results, such as exercise stress test and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Other CT angiography indications related coronary their respective scores of appropriate criteria in international guidelines (ACCF / SCCT / ACR / AHA / ASE / ASNC / NASCI / SCAI / SCMR2010 Appropriate Use Criteria for Cardiac Computed Tomography) are shown in Table 1 (1) .   coronary PATIENT FOR CORONARY OF CT angiography patients referred for CT angiography PREPARATION may receive beta blockers orally or intravenously to reduce the heart rate, unless there are contraindications such as heart failure, asthma or abnormalities in atrioventricular conduction (5). Beta blockers doses protocols used at our institution are detailed in Table 2.     The sublingual isosorbide dinitrate (3.75mg) is routinely administered shortly before acquisition of coronary CT angiography images if no contraindications such as pulmonary hypertension, severe aortic stenosis, use of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (such as using citrate of sildenafil in the past 24 hours or tadalafil in the last 72 hours) and migraine (5).   In our tomograph coronary CT angiography of institution are performed in 320-CT (Aquilion ONE, Toshiba Medical Systems, Tochigi-ken, Japan). All patients are examined with prospective acquisition coupled with the electrocardiogram (ECG), regardless of heart rate at the time of examination. This technique uses the recognition of R wave of the ECG, with an estimate of the RR interval, and sequential acquisition (non-helical) without moving the CT scanner table during the images acquisition (acquisition of the type step-and-shoot), and the only reconstruction cone beam (6). The planning of the acquisition of CT angiography in the tomograph is based on body mass index (BMI) for application of the lowest possible values ​​of kV and mA for each patient (Table 3) using the Sure Exposure 3D® (Tochigi-ken, Japan) with automatic exposure control system (7). The z-axis coverage ranges from 10 to 16cm, and the length in the craniocaudal axis 12 to 14cm is used in about 75% of patients. The default values ​​of CT scanners available from manufacturers are shown in Table 3. There is no table movement during image acquisition, then the pitch is zero. The image reconstruction algorithm uses the "half", which increases the temporal resolution for 175 msec (8), and Xact + on which corrects the angle of the cone beam X-ray tube 320-CT. The means of nonionic iodinated contrast (Henetix® 350mg / mL, Guerbet, Lille, France) is injected using the two-way injection system, with volume range from 50 to 100 mL, depending on the patient's BMI and the indication of CT angiography coronary, followed by 50 mL of saline bolus (5).   DOSE REDUCTION STRATEGY: RECONSTRUCTION ITERATIVE The CT images are formed from the reconstructions of radiation projections from multiple angles detected by the scanner, rear projection (BP, backprojection) or filtered back projection (FBP -filtered backprojection) associated with iterative reconstruction since 1970 (4). The "iterative" term refers to the method of successive approximations until satisfactory agreement with an initial image selected arbitrarily. Thus, by definition, the iterative reconstruction repeated numerous times reconstruction process and are much slower analytical methods (4). The increase of the low dose CT implies a reduction of the number of photons reaching the detectors, resulting in decreased signal-to-noise ratio and a larger number of high density linear artifacts (artifacts strike) (8,9). The AIDR-3D is an iterative reconstruction algorithm consists of several operations and was recently introduced to the market by Toshiba Medical Systems (Tochigi-ken, Japan). The purpose of the operations within data from projections acquired radiation is to reduce the high density linear artifacts (artifacts strike) caused by the reduction of the number of photons per photon of reduced energy. Then, a 3D filter for image smoothing is applied to the count values ​​of photons, whose performance is then increased statistical models of noise and scanner. Meanwhile, AIDR 3D-operations occur in the field of reconstruction of images, in order to reduce noise iteratively image (8). The final process involves a weighted mixture of primary and iterative reconstruction to create a reconstructed image with the AIDR-3D. The result of this combination are typical tomographic images, just as if they were acquired with the acquisition parameters of the scanner without mechanisms for reducing the radiation dose (10) (Figure 1). Currently, AIDR-3D can be applied to all image acquisition protocols used in clinical practice, being able to eliminate up to 50% of image noise and resulting in dose reduction of up to 65% (8) (Figure 2 ).   CONCLUSION In conclusion, the radiation dose of CT angiography of coronary arteries can be significantly reduced by following the principle "ALARA" ( "the low the achievable reasonable", "as low as reasonably achievable"), combining the examination statement with technical and documented to decrease the dose of radiation such as beta-blockers, reducing the kV, and the use of iterative reconstruction applications for reduction of radiation dose, as AIDR-3D.   