SUMMARY Computerized angiotomography of coronary arteries (coronary CT angiography) is an excellent non-invasive imaging method to evaluate coronary artery disease. Currently, the estimated effective radiation dose of coronary CT angiography can be reduced in modern CT scanners with multiple detectors, such as the CT scanner with 320 rows of detectors (320-CT), without loss in diagnostic accuracy of coronary CT angiography. To further reduce the radiation dose, new iterative reconstruction algorithms have recently been introduced by various manufacturers of scanners, which are currently routinely used in this test. We present our initial experience in coronary CT angiography using the 320-CT and Adaptive Iterative Dose Reduction 3D (AIDR-3D). We also present the most common indications of this examination in the routine of the institution as well as the acquisition of protocols, CT angiography of coronary arteries with updates related to this new technique to reduce the radiation dose. We conclude that the radiation dose of coronary CT angiography can be reduced by following the principle as low as reasonably achievable, combining the examination statement with well-documented techniques to reduce radiation dose, as the use of beta blockers and reducing the kV, and the latest iterative reconstruction applications for reduction of radiation dose, as AIDR-3D. Keywords: Coronary angiography; Coronary artery disease; Multi detector computed tomography; Ionizing radiation; Control of exposure to radiation; image processing computer-assisted; myocardial ischemia; Imaging diagnostic; Imaging techniques cardiac synchronization; cardiac imaging techniques INTRODUCTION The role of the computerized tomography angiography (CT angiography) of the coronary arteries was established in recent guidelines of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) as a noninvasive imaging method for the evaluation of coronary artery disease and some cardiovascular diseases (1). Currently, the estimated effective radiation dose of the coronary CT angiography can be drastically reduced using the last generation CT scanners, such as scanners with two X-ray tubes (DSCT) and scanners with 320 rows of detectors (320-CT) (2) without significant changes in the diagnostic accuracy of the coronary image (3). To optimize and reduce even more the radiation dose, new reconstruction iterative algorithms have recently been introduced by various manufacturers of CT scanners (4), currently being used, routinely, in coronary CT angiography. This paper presents our first experience with coronary CT angiography in 320-CT using Adaptive Iterative Dose Reduction 3D (AIDR-3D). The indications of coronary CT angiography acquisition and protocols related to the reduction of radiation dose are described.   INDICATIONS FOR CORONARY OF CT ANGIOGRAPHY Each indication of coronary CT angiography requires a specific protocol for CT angiography, which can greatly increase the dose of radiation. For example, protocols designed to evaluate patients undergoing coronary revascularization and CT angiography "to triple the emergency disposal" often require higher doses than in conventional coronary CT angiography(1). Most patients referred to our institution for performing coronary CT angiography presented, as main indication, a previous history of cardiovascular tests with conflicting results, such as exercise stress test and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Other indications from coronary CT angiography related to their respective scores under an appropriate criteria in international guidelines (ACCF/ SCCT/ ACR/ AHA/ ASE/ ASNC/ NASCI/ SCAI/ SCMR2010 Appropriate Use Criteria for Cardiac Computed Tomography) are shown in Table 1 (1).   PATIENT PREPARATION FOR CORONARY OF CT ANGIOGRAPHY Patients referred for CT angiography may receive beta blockers orally or intravenously to reduce the heart rate, unless there are contraindications such as heart failure, asthma or abnormalities in atrioventricular conduction (5). Beta blockers doses protocols used at our institution are detailed in Table 2.     The sublingual isosorbide dinitrate (3.75mg) is routinely administered shortly before acquisition of coronary CT angiography images if no contraindications such as pulmonary hypertension, severe aortic stenosis, use of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (such as using citrate of sildenafil in the past 24 hours or tadalafil in the last 72 hours) and migraine (5).   TOMOGRAPH In our institution coronary CT angiography are performed in 320-CT (Aquilion ONE, Toshiba Medical Systems, Tochigi-ken, Japan). All patients are examined with prospective acquisition coupled with the electrocardiogram (ECG), regardless of heart rate at the time of examination. This technique uses the recognition of R wave of the ECG, with an estimate of the R-R interval, and sequential acquisition (non-helical) without movement of the CT scanner table during the acquisition of images (acquisition of the type step-and-shoot), and the single reconstruction of conic beam (6). The planning of the acquisition of CT angiography in the tomograph is based on body mass index (BMI) for application of the lowest possible values of kV and mA for each patient (Table 3) using the Sure Exposure 3D® (Tochigi-ken, Japan) with automatic exposure control system (7). The z-axis coverage ranges from 10 to 16 cm, and the length in the craniocaudal axis 12 to 14 cm is used in about 75% of patients. The default values of CT scanners available from manufacturers are shown in Table 3. There is no table movement during image acquisition, so the pitch is equal to zero. The image reconstruction uses the "half" algorithm, which increases the temporal resolution for 175 ms(8), and the Xact + connected, which corrects the angle of the cone of the beam X-ray tube 320-CT. The nonionic iodinated contrast solution (Henetix® 350mg/mL, Guerbet, Lille, France) is injected using the two-way injection system, with volume range from 50 to 100 mL, depending on the patient's BMI and the indication of CT angiography coronary, followed by 50 mL of saline bolus (5).   DOSE REDUCTION STRATEGY: ITERATIVE RECONSTRUCTION The CT images are formed from the reconstructions of radiation projections from multiple angles detected by the scanner, rear projection (BP, backprojection) or filtered back projection (FBP -filtered backprojection) associated with iterative reconstructions since 1970 (4). The "iterative" term refers to the method of successive approximations until satisfactory agreement with an initial image selected arbitrarily. Thus, by definition, the iterative reconstructions repeat numerous times the reconstruction process and are much slower than analytical methods (4). The increase of the low dose CT implies a reduction of the number of photons reaching the detectors, resulting in decreased signal-to-noise ratio and a larger number of high density linear artifacts (artifacts strike) (8,9). The AIDR-3D is an iterative reconstruction algorithm that consists of several operations and was recently introduced to the market by Toshiba Medical Systems (Tochigi-ken, Japan). The objective of the operations within data space from acquired radiation projections is to reduce the high density linear artifacts (strike artifacts) caused by the reduction of the number of photons and by photons with reduced energy. Then, a 3D filter for image smoothing is applied to the count values of photons, whose performance is then increased by statistical models of noise and scanner. Meanwhile, AIDR 3D-operations occur in the field of reconstruction of images, in order to reduce image noise iteratively (8). The final process involves a weighted mixture of primary and iterative reconstruction to create a reconstructed image with the AIDR-3D. The result of this combination is typical tomographic images, just as if they were acquired with the acquisition parameters of the scanner without mechanisms for reducing the radiation dose (10) (Figure 1). Currently, AIDR-3D can be applied to all image acquisition protocols used in clinical practice, being able to eliminate up to 50% of image noise and resulting in dose reduction of up to 65% (8) (Figure 2).   CONCLUSION In conclusion, the radiation dose of CT angiography of coronary arteries can be significantly reduced by following the "ALARA" principle ("as low as reasonably achievable"), combining the examination indication with well-documented techniques to decrease the radiation dose such as beta-blockers, reducing the kV, and the use of iterative reconstruction applications for reduction of radiation dose, such as the AIDR-3D.   