 SUMMARY THE angiotomografia computerized coronary (angioTC of the coronary arteries) is an excellent method to image non-invasive to evaluate coronary artery disease. Currently, the dose of effective radiation estimated angioTC of the coronary arteries may be reduced as a result of the latest generation with multiple detectors, such as the ct scanner with 320 rows of detectors (320-CT), without loss in diagnostic accuracy of angioTC of coronary. To further reduce the radiation dose, new reconstruction algorithms iterative have been recently introduced by several manufacturers of ct scanner, which are currently routinely used in this examination. In this work, we present our initial experience in angioTC of the coronary arteries using a 320-CT and the Adaptive Iterative Dose Reduction 3D (AIDR-3D). We also present the most common indications of this examination in the routine of the institution as well as the protocols of the acquisition of, angioTC of the coronary with the updates related to this new technique to reduce the radiation dose. We conclude that the radiation dose of the angioTC of the coronary arteries can be reduced by following the principle of the budget of the reasonable achievable (as low as reasonably achievable), by combining the indication of the examination techniques are well documented for the reduction of the radiation dose, the use of beta-blockers and reduction of the kV, with the most recent applications of the reconstruction iterative reduction of the radiation dose, such as AIDR-3D. Key words: Angiography coronary; artery Disease, coronary; Tomography multidetectores; ionising Radiation; Control of exposure to radiation; image Processing, computer-assisted; myocardial Ischemia; Diagnostic imaging; imaging Techniques synchronization heart; imaging Techniques cardiac INTRODUCTION THE exam paper of angiotomografia computed (angioTC) of the coronary arteries was established in the latest guidelines of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) as a method of image non-invasive assessment of coronary artery disease and some cardiovascular diseases(1). Currently, the dose of effective radiation estimated angioTC of the coronary can be drastically reduced by means of the ct scanner of last generation, such as the ct scanner with two X-ray tubes (DISCOUNT) and the ct scanner with 320 rows of detectors (320-CT)(2), without significant changes in the diagnostic accuracy of the image of the coronary arteries(3). To optimize and further reduce the radiation dose, new algorithms in iterative reconstruction have been recently introduced by several manufacturers of ct scanner(4), and is now in routine use in the angioTC of coronary. This paper presents our first experience with the angioTC coronary bypass in the 320-CT using Adaptive Iterative Dose Reduction 3D (AIDR-3D). Are described the indications of the angioTC of the coronary and the protocols of acquisitions related to the reduction of the radiation dose. INDICATIONS OF ANGIOTC OF CORONARY heart Each indication of the angioTC of coronary heart demand a specific protocol of angioTC, which can have the dose of radiation greatly enhanced. For example, the protocols designed to evaluate patients submitted to myocardial revascularization and the angioTC "for disposal triple in the emergency" often require higher doses than in the angioTC coronary conventional(1). The majority of patients referred to our institution for the completion of the angioTC coronary presented as the main indication for examinations cardiovascular pregressos with conflicting results, as the exercise test of effort and computed tomography single photon emission (SPECT). Other indications of angioTC of coronary related to the respective scores of the appropriate criteria in the international guidelines (ACCF/SCCT/ACR/ AHA/ASE/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SCMR2010 Appropriate Use Criteria for Cardiac Computed Tomography) are displayed in table 1(1). PREPARATION OF the PATIENT FOR ANGIOTC OF CORONARY Patients referred for angioTC of coronary can receive beta-blockers orally or intravenously to reduce the heart rate, unless there are contraindications, such as heart failure, asthma or abnormalities in the atrioventricular conduction(5). The protocols of doses of beta-blockers used in our institution are detailed in table 2. The isosorbide dinitrate sublingual (3,75 mg) is administered routinely just before the acquisition of the images of the angioTC coronary if there are no contraindications, such as pulmonary hypertension, aortic stenosis, severe use of inhibitors of phosphodiesterase type 5 (such as the use of sildenafil citrate in the past 24 hours or tadalafil within the last 72 hours), and migraine(5). Ct SCANNER At our institution the angioTC of the coronary are held in the 320-CT (Aquilion ONE, Toshiba Medical Systems, Tochigi-ken, Japan). All patients are examined with the acquisition foresight coupled to the electrocardiogram (ECG), regardless of the heart rate at the time of the examination. This technique uses the recognition of the R wave of the ECG, estimation of the range of R-R, and acquiring the sequential (not spiral) without movement of the table of the ct scanner during the acquisition of the images (the acquisition of the step-and-shoot), in addition to the reconstruction, single-tapered beam(6). The planning of the acquisition of angioTC in the ct scanner is based on body mass index (BMI) for the implementation of the lowest values possible of kV and mA for each patient (Table 3), using the Sure Exposure 3D® (Tochigi-ken, Japan) with a system of automatic exposure control(7). The coverage of the z-axis ranges from 10 to 16cm, and the extension on the shaft craniocaudal 12 to 14cm is used in about 75% of the patients. The default values of the ct scanner provided by the manufacturers are shown in table 3. There is no table movement during the acquisition of images, then the pitch is equal to zero. The reconstruction of the images uses the algorithm to "half", which increases the temporal resolution to 175ms(8), and Xact+ connected, which corrects the angle of the cone beam of the X-ray tube of the 320-CT. The contrast medium iodinated non-ionic (Henetix® 350mg/mL, Guerbet, Lille, France) is injected using the injection system of a dual carriageway, with the variation of the volume of 50 to 100mL, as the BMI of the patient and the indication of the angioTC coronary bypass, followed by 50mL of saline solution in bólus(5). STRATEGY OF DOSE REDUCTION: RECONSTRUCTION ITERATIVE images of CT are formed on the basis of the reconstructions of the projections of the radiation at multiple angles detected by the ct scanner, with the backprojection (BP, backprojection or filtered backprojection (FBP -filtered backprojection), associated with reconstructions iterative since 1970(4). The term "iterative" refers to the method of successive approximations until the agreement satisfactory with an initial image, selected arbitrarily. Thus, by definition, the reconstructions iterative repeat the reconstruction process countless times and are much slower than the analytical methods(4). The increase of CT low-dose implies a reduction in the number of photons reaching the detectors, resulting in a decrease of the signal-to-noise and in a greater number of artifacts high-density linear (artifacts strike)(8,9). The AIDR 3D is an algorithm of reconstruction iterative composed of several operations and has recently been introduced in the market by Toshiba Medical Systems (Tochigi-ken, Japan). The goal of the operations in the data space of the projections of the radiation acquired is to reduce the artifacts of linear high-density (artifacts strike), caused by the reduction of the number of photons and for photons of reduced energy. Then, a filter for 3D smoothing of the image is applied to the count values of the photons, whose performance is increased further by statistical models of the noise and of the ct scanner. Meanwhile, the operations of AIDR-3D occur in the field of reconstruction of images, with the aim of reducing the noise of the image, iteratively(8). The final process involves a mixture number of reconstructions, iterative and primary, to create an image reconstructed with AIDR-3D. The result of this combination are images like ct typical, as if they were simply acquired with the acquisition parameters of the ct scanner, without mechanisms for reducing the dose of radiation(10) (Figure 1). Currently, the AIDR-3D can be applied to all protocols of image acquisition used in daily clinical practice, being able to eliminate up to 50% of image noise resulting in dose reduction of up to 65%(8) (Figure 2). Conclusion In CONCLUSION, the radiation dose of the angiotomografia computerized coronary heart can be significantly reduced, following the principle of "ALARA" ("the budget of the reasonable achievable", "as low as reasonably achievable"), combining the indication of the examination techniques are well documented for the reduction of the radiation dose, the use of beta-blockers, the reduction of the kV and the use of the applications of the reconstruction iterative reduction of the radiation dose, such as AIDR-3D. 