OBJECTIVE: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with cholecystitis with gallstones, although the management of choledocholithiasis associated still remains controversial. This study was based on a prospective analysis of patients undergoing elective cholecystectomy with perioperative cholangiography, intending thereby to evaluate the examination of positivity contrasted biliary in patients with cholelithiasis no indication for cholangiography. METHODS: We included in the study, 100 patients with clinical, laboratory and imaging parameters made no later than 10 days before the operation showed no change preoperatively and therefore considered unsuspected patients for choledocholithiasis. The cholangiography were analyzed and examined by the surgical team, the radiologist and the authors of this study. The reports were compared and correlated with clinical and laboratory findings previous patients. RESULTS: The incidence of unsuspected choledocholithiasis preoperatively was only one case among 100 patients without indication for the exam (1% positive). CONCLUSION: Based on this material, it can be concluded that the use of selective cholangiography is safe and should be used in the treatment of calculosis cholecystitis. Key words: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy. CDL. Cholelithiasis. Cholangiography.     INTRODUCTION Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is now the treatment of choice for patients with cholecystitis with gallstones, although the management of choledocholithiasis associated still remain subject controverso1,2. Ludwig et al., German study found that only 6% of institutions use the Perioperative cholangiography (CPO) in a systematic way during the CL, 49.5% use it selectively and 43% of the institutions do not conduct any diagnostic procedure in perioperative act of CL3. Although the systematic use of CPO is still defended by a considerable portion of surgeons who opt for the instrumentation of the biliary tract in perioperative CL, the largest share argues that the CPO held in a systematic way, has not brought about results for the cost4, bringing the surgical time, the number of false positives, overestimating the diagnostic coledocolitíase5,6 and especially increasing the proportion of patients undergoing unnecessary instrumentation of the biliary tract with the inherent risks of morbidity and mortality 5.7. Matthew et al., In a meta-analysis, reported 4209 CPO held in unsuspected patients preoperatively for gallstones in the bile duct. Among the total, was found in 170 (4%) cases of choledocholithiasis in patients without a history of pancreatitis, clinical, biochemical and ultrasonographic suggestive of gallstones in the common bile duct. Also points out that only 15% of those with silent choledocholithiasis, unsuspected, untreated, will present some type of complication, ie only 0.6% without prior indication for the contrast examination of the biliares6 way. It should be emphasized that literature has well-defined criteria for inclusion of patients with possible choledocholithiasis and should be submitted to cholangiography. However, the literature does not exclude safely asymptomatic patients without indicating the contrast examination of 8-11. Thus, this work proposes to evaluate the positivity of cholangiography in patients with cholelithiasis no indication for cholangiography.   METHODS This study was based on a prospective analysis of patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy with perioperative cholangiography. For inclusion in the study, patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy should be necessarily with chronic cholecystitis calculi and not show any recent changes, clinical, laboratory and ultrasound that showed any kind of CDL and thus, during surgery, performed himself to cholangiography 12.13. Were analyzed in the period from May 2008 to February 2009, one hundred consecutive laparoscopic cholecystectomy with cholangiography Perioperative in patients with cholecystitis without formal indication preoperatively to contrast examination of the bile ducts. The criteria used for cholangiography Perioperative indication are present or past history of jaundice, acute cholecystitis or acute pancreatitis in the last 6 months, laboratory parameters, elevated bilirubin, GGT (alkaline phosphatase and gamma-GT), and recent ultrasound with dilatation bile duct and / or CDL 6.14. In the perioperative CPO was made when there was difficulty in identifying the main bile duct. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the UFTM, and all patients were included after signing the free and informed consent. Thus, the finding of one or more changes of these parameters was considered excluding factor of the patient in this study, to present formal criteria for indication of CPO. So we were included in the study, 100 patients whose clinical, laboratory and imaging, made no later than 10 days prior to cholecystectomy, showed no change preoperatively and therefore considered unsuspected patients for choledocholithiasis. In all cases, cholangiography was preceded by muscle relaxant administration (eosin / glucagon) and was performed with iodinated contrast to 30% slowly injected warm by a transparent catheter positioned in the common bile duct by the cystic duct avoiding, thus, the spasm of the sphincter Oddi. The technique used was described by Mirizzi15, performing three rays: after the first introduction of 3 to 5 ml, the second to complete 8 to 10 mL, and the third with the remainder contrast, totaling 15 ml. The first two radiographs are intended viewing calculations, stenoses, and the passage of the contrast into the duodenum, common bile duct demonstrating that showed no obstruction. The third objective x-ray visualization of intra-hepática16 biliary tree. The cholangiography were analyzed and examined by the surgical team, the radiologist and the authors of this study. The reports were compared and correlated with clinical and laboratory findings previous patients.   RESULTS We performed 100 elective laparoscopic cholecystectomies with perioperative cholangiography, with an average time of 13.54 minutes for the contrast examination. Among the patients studied, 16 cases were male and 84 were female. The average age for men was 44.07 years and for women of 45.64 years. Regarding the skin color, it is the distribution: 81% white, 15% and 4% dark brown. Therefore, we found a significant predominance of white women aged between the fourth and fifth decades. Regarding laboratory tests, it was observed that the inclusion criteria, all tests were within the normal range: FA: 65.72 U / L (vr: 122U / L), gamma-GT: 49.82 U / L (vr: 71 U / L), total bilirubin: 0.62 mg / dL (vr: 1.2 mg / dl), direct bilirubin: 0,20mg / dL (vr: 0.4 mg / dL). There was, in this material, complications related to examination and it was possible to perform it in all cases. The incidence of unsuspected choledocholithiasis preoperatively was only one case among 100 patients without indication for the examination (Figure 1). The unsuspected choledocholithiasis was verified by cholangiography in a 67-year-old patient, white, female, with no clinical history, laboratory abnormalities or ultrasound suggestive of choledocholithiasis; AF: 72.0 U / L; gamma-GT: 19.0 U / L; BBT: 0.50 mg / dL; BDD: 0.10 mg / dL. This represented therefore the prevalence of 1% positivity of cholangiography Perioperative, when performed selectively and judiciously.     DISCUSSION Cholangiography Perioperative (CPO) represents a significant advance in the diagnosis of gallstones in the common bile duct. The indications aimed choledocholithiasis detection, based on the evaluation of the anatomy and topography of the gallbladder and bile duct for safe dissection and lower rates of injury to the bile ducts during CL 17,18. The natural history of unsuspected choledocholithiasis has been studied in various populations and therapeutic approach remains controversial for several groups. Some articles state that the CPO when performed systematically, result 10-12% positive; in contrast, when performed selectively and judiciously, present values ​​equal to or less than 1% of positividade19,6 was noted in this study, a positive 1% for perioperative examination which is in accordance with the values ​​found in literature4, 5,7,12,10,17,19. It can be inferred about the rate of 1% positive for choledocholithiasis found that only 0.15% of patients would present complications in the postoperative period based on the study of Matthew et al. Another reported fact is that the CPO does not prevent, but can provide the perioperative diagnosis of bile duct injuries. It could also be useful to show anomalies of VBP, which did not occur in any of the patients studied. Importantly, in this study, in addition to the detailed medical history, laboratory tests and imaging were performed in at most 10 days before the surgical procedure. Another fact that should be considered is the time spent to achieve the cholangiography. In this study, on average, 13, 54 minutes for the time corresponding to 35% of the total surgical laparoscopic cholecystectomy time, increasing anesthetic time and the total time of the procedure, plus 20 of the cost of contrast, catheter, syringe and movies radiological 5-8,10,12,17,19,21-23. Some reports include a risk of cholelithiasis and choledocholithiasis or older than 70 years 24,25. It was noted that the patient who had choledocholithiasis, in this study, 67 years old, and the bile duct had 0.7 cm wide and can suggest the age of 65 years, not 70 years, should be included as criterion for inclusion of cholangiography during the surgery. Based on this material, it can be concluded that the use of selective cholangiography is safe detection of choledocholithiasis and should be used in the surgical treatment of chronic cholecystitis calculi.   