OBJECTIVE: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with calculous cholecystitis, although the management of choledocholithiasis associated still remains controversial. This study was based on a prospective analysis of patients undergoing elective cholecystectomy with perioperative cholangiography, thereby intending  to evaluate the positivity of duct bile contrast-enhanced exam in patients with cholelithiasis with no indication for cholangiography. METHODS: We included in the study 100 patients whose clinical, laboratory and imaging parameters made no later than 10 days before the cholecystectomy showed no change preoperatively and, therefore, were considered unsuspected patients for choledocholithiasis. The cholangiographies were analyzed and examined by the surgical team, the radiologist and the authors of this study. The reports were compared and correlated with previous clinical and laboratory findings on the patients. RESULTS: The incidence of unsuspected choledocholithiasis preoperatively was only one case among 100 patients without indication for the exam (1% positive). CONCLUSION: Based on this material, we can conclude that the use of selective cholangiography is safe and should be used in the treatment of calculous cholecystitis. Key words: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy. CDL. Cholelithiasis. Cholangiography.     INTRODUCTION Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is today the treatment of choice for patients with calculous cholecystitis, although the management of choledocholithiasis associated still remains a controversial subject1,2. Ludwig et al., German study, found that only 6% of institutions use the Perioperative cholangiography (POC) sistematically during the LC, 49.5% use it selectively and 43% of the institutions do not conduct any perioperative diagnostic procedure during LC3. Although the systematic use of CPO is still defended by a substantial number of surgeons who go for the instrumentation of the biliary tract on the perioperative LC, the largest share argues that the POC held systematically hasn't been cost-effective4, increases the duration of surgery, the number of false positives, overestimates the diagnoses of cholelithiasis 5,6 and, above all, increases the proportion of patients undergoing unnecessary procedures in the biliary tract with inherent risks of morbidity and mortality 5.7. Matthew et al., in a meta-analysis, reported 4209 POC held in unsuspected patients preoperatively for gallstones in the bile duct. Among the total, 170 (4%) cases of choledocholithiasis in patients without a history of pancreatitis, clinical, biochemical and ultrasonographic alterations suggestive of gallstones in the common bile duct were found. He also points out that only 15% of those with silent choledocholithiasis, unsuspected, untreated, will present some type of complication, in other words, only 0.6% without prior indication for the contrast-enhanced examination of the biliary tract. It should be emphasized that literature has well-defined criteria for the inclusion of patients with possible choledocholithiasis and should be submitted to cholangiography. However, literature does not safely 
exclude asymptomatic patients without indication to the contrasted examination 8-11. Thus, this work proposes to evaluate the positivity of cholangiography in patients with cholelithiasis with no indication for cholangiography.   METHODS This study was based on a prospective analysis of patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy with perioperative cholangiography. As criterion of inclusion in the study, patients undergoing elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy must necessarily have chronic calculous cholecystitis and not present any recent clinical, laboratory and ultrasound changed that showed any kind of CDL allowing thus, cholangiography during the surgery12.13. Were analyzed from May 2008 to February 2009, one hundred consecutive laparoscopic cholecystectomies with perioperative cholangiography in patients with chronic calculous cholecystitis without formal indication preoperatively to contrasted examination of the bile ducts. The criteria used to indicate perioperative cholangiography are present or past history of jaundice, acute cholecystitis or acute pancreatitis in the last 6 months, laboratory parameters, elevated bilirubin and canalicular enzymes (alkaline phosphatase and gamma-GT), and recent ultrasound with dilation of the bile duct and/or CDL 6.14. In the perioperative, POC was made when there was difficulty in identifying the main biliary duct. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the UFTM, and all patients were included after signing the free and informed consent. Thus, one or more alterations in these parameters was considered a excluding factor of the patient for this study, due to showing formal criteria that indicate POC. Therefore, we included 100 patients whose clinical, laboratory and imaging, made no later than 10 days prior to cholecystectomy, showed no change preoperatively and thus were considered unsuspected patients for choledocholithiasis. In all cases, cholangiography was preceded by muscle relaxant administration (eosin/glucagon) and performed with warm iodinated contrast medium at 30%, slowly injected by a transparent catheter positioned in the common bile duct by the cystic duct, avoiding, thus, the spasm of sphincter of Oddi. The technique used was described by Mirizzi15, performing three radiographies: the first after  introducing 3 to 5 ml, the second until it completes 8 to 10 mL, and the third with the remaining contrast, totaling 15 ml. The first two radiographies aim to visualize calculi, stenoses, and the passage of the contrast into the duodenum, demonstrating that the common bile duct showed no obstruction. The third x-ray aims to show the visualization of intrahepatic biliary tree16. The cholangiography were analyzed and examined by the surgical team, the radiologist and the authors of this study. The reports were compared and correlated with  previous clinical and laboratory findings from the patients.   RESULTS We performed 100 elective laparoscopic cholecystectomies with perioperative cholangiography, with an average time of 13.54 minutes for the contrasted examination. Among the patients studied, 16 cases were male and 84 were female. The average age for men was 44.07 years, and for women, of 45.64 years. Regarding  skin color, the distribution was 81% white, 15% brown and 4% black. Therefore, we found a significant predominance of white women aged between the fourth and fifth decades. Regarding laboratory tests, it was observed that according to the inclusion criteria, all tests were within the normal range: AF: 65.72 U /L (rv: 122U /L), gamma-GT: 49.82 U /L (rv: 71 U /L), total bilirubin: 0.62 mg /dL (rv: 1.2 mg /dL), direct bilirubin: 0,20mg /dL (rv: 0.4 mg /dL). There weren't complications in this material related to the exam and it was possible to perform it in all cases. The incidence of unsuspected choledocholithiasis preoperatively was of only one case among 100 patients without indication for the exam (Image 1). The unsuspected choledocholithiasis was verified by cholangiography in a 67-year-old patient, white, female, with no clinical history, laboratory or ultrasound abnormalities 
suggestive of choledocholithiasis; AF: 72.0 U/L; gamma-GT: 19.0 U/L; BbT: 0.50 mg /dL; BdD: 0.10 mg /dL. This represented therefore the prevalence of 1% positivity of perioperative cholangiography, when performed selectively and judiciously.     DISCUSSION Perioperative cholangiography (POC) represents a significant advance in the diagnosis of gallstones in the common bile duct. The indications aim to detect choledocholithiasis based on the evaluation of the anatomy and topography of the gallbladder and bile duct for safe dissection and lower rates of injury to the bile ducts during CL 17,18. The natural history of unsuspected choledocholithiasis has been studied in various populations and therapeutic approach remains controversial for several groups. Some articles state that the POC, when performed systematically, results in 10-12% of positivity; in contrast, when performed selectively and judiciously, present values equal to or less than 1% of positivity19,6 We noted, in this study, a positivity of 1% for perioperative examination, which is in accordance with the values found in literature4, 5,7,12,10,17,19. It can be inferred about this rate of 1% positive for choledocholithiasis, that only 0.15% of patients would present complications in the postoperative period, based on the study of Matthew et al. Another reported fact is that the POC does not prevent, but can provide the perioperative diagnosis of bile duct injuries. It could also be useful to show anomalies of CBD, which did not occur in any of the patients studied. It's important to mention that, in this study, in addition to the detailed medical history, laboratory tests and imaging were performed at no more than 10 days before the surgical procedure. Another fact that should be considered is the time spent to perform the cholangiography. In this study it was, on average, 13.54 minutes, which corresponds to 35% of the total surgical laparoscopic cholecystectomy time, increasing anesthetic time and total time of the procedure, plus 20 of the cost of contrast, catheter, syringe and radiological films 5-8,10,12,17,19,21-23. Some reports include risk of cholelithiasis and/or choledocholithiasis for patients older than 70 years 24,25. It was noted that the patient who had choledocholithiasis, was in this study 67 years old, and the bile duct was 0.7 cm wide, which can suggest that being over 65 and not 70 years, should be included as a criterion for inclusion of cholangiography during the surgery. Based on this material, it can be concluded that the use of selective cholangiography is safe in the detection of choledocholithiasis and should be used in the surgical treatment of chronic calculous cholecystitis.   