 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with colecistopatia calculous, although the management of coledocolitíase associated still remains a controversial subject. The present study was based on prospective analysis of patients undergoing cholecystectomy elective cholangiography intraoperative us, and aims to assess the positivity of the exam contrasted bile ducts in patients with cholelithiasis without indication for cholangiography. METHODS: Were included in the study, 100 patients whose clinical parameters, laboratory and image made no later than 10 days prior to the cholecystectomy did not show any change in the pre-operative period and, therefore, considered patients unsuspected to coledocolitíase. The colangiografias were analyzed and examined by the surgical team, by the radiologist and by the authors of this study. The reports were compared and correlated with clinical findings and laboratory prior patients. RESULTS: THE incidence of coledocolitíase unexpected in the preoperative period was only a single case among the 100 patients without an indication for the exam (1% positivity). CONCLUSION: based on this material, it can be concluded that the use of cholangiography selective is secure and should be employed in the treatment of calculous cholecystitis. Descriptors: laparoscopic Cholecystectomy. Coledocolitíase. Cholelithiasis. Cholangiography. INTRODUCTION laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is today the treatment of choice for patients with colecistopatia calculous, although the management of coledocolitíase associated remain subject controverso1,2. Ludwig et al., in the German study, found that only 6% of the institutions use the cholangiography intraoperative us (CPO) in a systematic way during the CL, 49.5 per cent use it selectively and 43% of the institutions do not carry out any diagnostic procedure peroperatório in the act of CL3. Although the systematic use of CPO is still espoused by a significant portion of the surgeons who opt for the instrumentation via the bile in the peroperatório of the CL, the greater part argues that the CPO conducted a systematic way, has not yielded results corresponding to the custo4, increasing the surgical time, the number of false positives, either overestimating the diagnostic coledocolitíase5,6 and, mainly, by increasing the proportion of patients submitted to instrumentation not required via the bile with the inherent risks of morbidity and mortality of 5.7. Matthew et al., in a study of meta-analysis, reported 4209 CPO performed in patients unsuspected in the preoperative period for cholelithiasis in hepatocolédoco. Among the total, was found in 170 (4%) cases of coledocolitíase in patients without a history of pancreatitis, changes in clinical, biochemical and ultrassonográficas suggestive of cholelithiasis in via the biliary primary. Further notes that only 15% of those with coledocolitíase silent, unexpected, it is not treated, it will present some kind of complication, that is, only 0.6% no indication prior to the test contrasted the way biliares6. It should be emphasized that the literature presents well defined criteria for inclusion of patients with possible coledocolitíase, and which should be submitted to cholangiography. However, the literature does not delete safely the patients are asymptomatic, without indication to the examination contrasted 8-11. In this way, this work proposes to evaluate the positivity of cholangiography in patients with cholelithiasis without indication for cholangiography. METHODS THE present study was based on prospective analysis of patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy elective cholangiography intraoperative us. As a criterion of inclusion in the study, the patients submitted to laparoscopic cholecystectomy elective should necessarily be the carriers of colecistopatia chronic calculous and does not show any recent change, clinical, laboratory and ultrasound suggestive of any type of coledocolitíase and, in this manner, in the surgical act, was cholangiography 12,13. Were analyzed in the period from may 2008 to February 2009, one hundred laparoscopic cholecystectomies streak with cholangiography intraoperative us in patients with colecistopatia chronic calculous without formal indication in the pre-operative examination as contrasted bile ducts. The criteria used for indication of cholangiography intraoperative us are the presence or past of jaundice, acute cholecystitis or acute pancreatitis in the last 6 months, laboratory parameters, elevation of bilirrubinas, enzymes canaliculares (alkaline phosphatase and gamma-GT), and ultrasonography recent expansion of the via biliary and/or coledocolitíase 6,14. In peroperatório the CPO was done when there was difficulty in identification of the pathway of bile primary. The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the UFTM, and all patients were included after signing the term of free and informed consent. In this way, the meeting of one or more changes of these parameters has been considered with a factor for exclusion of the patient of this study, by presenting formal criteria of indication of the CPO. Therefore, were included in the study, 100 patients, whose clinical parameters, laboratory and image, made up to a maximum of 10 days prior to the cholecystectomy, did not show any change in the pre-operative period and, therefore, considered patients unsuspected to coledocolitíase. In all cases, the ercp was preceded by administration of a muscle relaxant (eosin/glucagon) and was performed with iodinated contrast in the 30% warm injected slowly through a catheter transparent positioned in the colédoco by the cystic duct and avoiding, with this, the spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. The technique used was described by Mirizzi15, doing three x-rays: the first after the introduction of 3 to 5 ml, the second to complete 8 to 10 ml, and the third with the rest of the contrast, a total of 15 ml. The first two x-rays designed to display calculations, stenosis, and the passage of the contrast to the duodenum, showing that the duct hepatocolédoco did not present obstruction. The third x-ray lens for visualization of the biliary tree intra-hepática16. The colangiografias were analyzed and examined by the surgical team, by the radiologist and by the authors of this study. The reports were compared and correlated with clinical findings and laboratory prior patients. RESULTS Were performed 100 laparoscopic cholecystectomies elective with cholangiography intraoperative us, with average time of 13,54 minutes for the exam contrasted. Among the patients reviewed, 16 cases were male and 84 were female. The average age found for the men was 44,07 years and, for women, 45,64 years. In relation to the color of the skin, has the distribution: 81% white, 15% mixed race and 4% black. Therefore, we find a preponderance of significant white women with age between the fourth and fifth decades. With respect to laboratory tests, it was observed that, by inclusion criteria, all tests were found within normal ranges: AF: 65,72 U/L (rv: 122U/L), gamma-GT: 49,82 U/L (rv: 71 U/L), total bilirubin: 0,62 mg/dL (vr: 1.2 mg/dL) and bilirubin direct: 0,20 mg/dL (vr: 0.4 mg/dL). There was, in this material, complications related to the exam and it was possible to do it in all cases. The incidence of coledocolitíase unexpected in the preoperative period was only a single case among the 100 patients without an indication for the examination (Figure 1). The coledocolitíase unexpected was checked by cholangiography in a patient of 67 years old, white, female, without medical history, changes in laboratory or ultrassonográficas suggestive of coledocolitíase; FA: 72,0 U/L; gamma-GT: 19,0 U/L; BbT: 0.50 mg/dL; BdD: 0.10 mg/dL. This represented, therefore, the prevalence of 1% positivity of cholangiography intraoperative us, when performed in a selective manner and careful. DISCUSSION THE cholangiography intraoperative us (CPO) represents a significant advance in the diagnosis of cholelithiasis in via the biliary primary. The signs are aimed at detection of coledocolitíase, based on the evaluation of the anatomy and topography of the gall bladder and hepatocolédoco for a safe dissection and lower rates of injury to the bile ducts during the CL 17,18. The natural history of coledocolitíase unexpected has been studied in several populations and conduct therapy remains controversial to diverse groups. Some articles refer that the CPO, when conducted systematically, would result in 10-12% of positivity; on the other hand, when done selectively and judiciously, it would have shown values less than or equal to 1% of positividade19,6 it was Noted, in this study, a positivity of 1% for the exam peroperatório which is in agreement with the values found in the literatura4,5,7,12,10,17,19. It can be inferred about the rate of 1% positivity for coledocolitíase found, that only 0,15% of the patients would develop complications in the postoperative period based on the study of Matthew et al. Another fact reported is that the CPO does not prevent, but may provide the diagnosis peroperatório lesions via bile. It would also be useful to highlight anomalies in the VBP, a fact that has not occurred in any of the patients studied. It is important to note that, in this study, in addition to the detailed medical history, laboratory tests and imaging were carried out in a maximum of 10 days before the surgical procedure. Another fact that should be considered is the time spent for the completion of the cholangiography. In this study were, on average, 13, 54 minutes, time which corresponds to 35% of the surgical time of total laparoscopic cholecystectomy, increasing the anesthetic time and the total time of the procedure, plus 20 of the cost of the contrast, catheter, syringe, and films, radiological 5-8,10,12,17,19,21-23. Some reports include with risk of cholelithiasis and / or coledocolitíase over the age of 70 years 24,25. It was noted that the patient presented coledocolitíase had, in this study, 67 years of age, and that the hepatocolédoco had 0.7 cm width, can suggest the age above 65 years and not 70 years, should be included as a criterion for inclusion of cholangiography in peroperatório. Based on this material, it can be concluded that the use of cholangiography selective is secure in the detection of coledocolitíase and should be employed in the surgical treatment of chronic cholecystitis calculous. 