ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: The performance of the coronary angiography in heart failure of unknown etiology is often justified for diagnostic evaluation of ischemic heart disease. However, the clinical benefit of this strategy is unknown. To assess the prevalence of ischemic heart disease by angiographic criteria in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction without etiology, as well as their impact on therapeutic decisions. METHODS: Consecutive outpatients with heart failure and systolic dysfunction, who had coronary angiography indicated for etiologic elucidation of heart disease in the period from January 1st, 2009 to December 31st, 2010. Patients diagnosed with coronary artery disease, positive serology for Chagas' disease, congenital heart disease, severe valvular heart disease or patients undergoing heart transplantation were excluded from the analysis. The sample was divided into two groups as indicated for catheterization. Group-1: Symptomatic due to angina pectoris or refractory heart failure. Group-2: Presence of > 2 risk factors for coronary artery disease RESULTS: One hundred and seven patients were included for analysis, 51 (47.7%) patients in the group-1 and 56 (52.3%), t0 group-2. The prevalence of ischemic heart disease was of 9.3% (10 patients), and all of them belonged to Group-1 (p = 0.0001). During follow-up, only 4 (3.7%) had coronary artery bypass indication; 3 (2.8%) patients had complications related to the procedure. CONCLUSION: In our study, the coronary angiography in patients with heart failure and systolic dysfunction without etiology, although grounded by current guidelines, showed no benefit when indicated only by the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease. Keywords: Coronary Angiography/use, left ventricular dysfunction, myocardial ischemia, heart failure Introduction Ischemic heart disease is responsible for about two thirds of cases of patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction in Unidos¹ States, currently the main cause also in Brasil2,3. This etiological differentiation is critical in clinical practice for several reasons. Patients with heart failure with ischemic origin have a worse prognosis compared to other etiologies 4. The potential benefit of myocardial revascularization procedures and of the pharmacotherapy in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease is also a critical factor to be considered in the therapeutic decision. Patients with heart failure are considered patients with ischemic etiology when presenting a stroke history, revascularization or angiographic evidence of obstructive coronary artery disease, as prévia5 publication. Noninvasive methods for assessing myocardial ischemia in this population are of limited use, since the presence of perfusion deficits and changes in segmental mobility are often present in patients with non-ischemic heart diseases 6,7. Thus, the evaluation of coronary anatomy by cardiac catheterization is considered the procedure of choice for the investigation of ischemic heart disease in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction without etiology defined 8. According to the current guidelines of chronic heart failure, one should consider the performance of cardiac catheterization in patients with ventricular dysfunction without defined etiology in the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease, symptoms of refractory heart failure or angina 8. However, the lack of data in the literature on the diagnostic yield of the invasive strategy in this population, in addition to the potential for vascular complications related to the procedure, makes its indication uncertain.   Objective To assess the prevalence of ischemic heart disease by angiographic criteria in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction without defined etiology according to different criteria of indication, as well as their impact on therapeutic decisions.   Methods Design Cross-sectional study followed by retrospective cohort.   We analyzed sample data from patients treated at the surgical clinic of heart failure in a tertiary institution of reference for high complexity, between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2010. All elective coronary angiograms in this period were verified, and subsequently accessed retrospectively to the sample characteristics. The collected variables included: echocardiographic data from one year before or after the procedure to calculate the ejection fraction of the left ventricle by Teicholz method; functional class of the New York Heart Association; previous diagnosis of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia (patients using statins or LDL - cholesterol > 160 mg/dL), premature family history of cardiovascular disease (men < 45 years and women < 55 years), chronic kidney disease (estimated creatinine clearance < 60 mL/min), current smoking or in the last 10 years and the presence of coronary artery disease (myocardial stroke or history of surgical or percutaneous revascularization). Evaluated also the results of serological tests for Chagas' disease (indirect immunofluorescence method and enzyme immunoassay), presence of congenital or valvular heart disease, besides the demographic characteristics. We selected only patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction that remained without defined etiology after initial non-invasive clinical assessment. Inclusion criteria were: left ventricular ejection fraction < 45% and age > 18 years. Patients with coronary artery disease, positive serology for Chagas' disease, congenital heart disease, severe valvular heart disease or that underwent heart transplantation were excluded from analysis. The sample was divided into two groups according to the criteria indicated cardiac catheterization. Group-1: Symptomatic due to angina or refractory heart failure (eg. functional class III or IV despite optimal drug treatment) independent risk factor profile for coronary artery disease. Group-2: patients without angina and in functional class I or II with the presence of > 2 risk factors for coronary artery disease (age > 45 years for men and 55 for women, hypercholesterolemia, smoking, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, premature family history of cardiovascular disease or diabetes mellitus). After the procedure, patients were classified with ischemic or nonischemic etiology. The angiographic criteria used were based on previously published definitions by Felker et al 5 who considered ischemic patients with obstructive lesions (> 75%) in two or more epicardial vessels or left main coronary artery or anterior descending proximal branch 5. Patients diagnosed with ischemic heart disease were evaluated for a surgical or percutaneous indication of CABG on outpatient follow-up according to the criteria of the physician responsible for the case. The starting date of the action was the time of the coronary angiography and the last date of the follow-up was considered the day of revascularization or the last recorded appointment in electronic medical records. Statistical analysis Continuous variables were expressed in averages ± standard deviation and were compared using the Student t test. Categorical variables were compared using Fisher's exact test.   Results During the study period were evaluated 1,970 patients. After initial clinical evaluation and application of eligibility criteria, only 107 (5.4%) patients had heart failure with systolic left ventricular dysfunction of undefined etiology, were included for analysis. Demographic data as the indication for catheterization are shown in Table 1. Fifty-one patients were in Group-1 and 56, in the Group-2. Patients had an average of 2.5 (± 1.3) risk factors for coronary artery disease, and 2.3 (± 1.4) in Group-1 and 2.7 (± 1.2) in Group-2 (p = 0.19). The prevalence of angiographic changes consistent with ischemic heart disease was 9.3% (10 patients) among the 107 patients included, all belonging to the Group-1 (p = 0.0001). During follow-up, only 4 (3.7%) had surgical indication for CABG or percutaneous (tab. 2). In the analysis of the Group-1 patients, 19 patients had angina and 32, symptoms of refractory heart failure. The prevalence of ischemic heart disease in these subgroups was of 26.3% (5 patients) and 15.6% (5 patients), respectively. Three patients (2.8%) that underwent catheterization had complications related to the procedure. A patient with acute occlusion of the radial artery, the other with acute occlusion of the brachial artery, and the third with ischemic stroke. All patients were alive until the end of analysis and no lost follow-up. The mean follow-up was 15.6 months (± 7.6).   Discussion This study was the first among us to investigate the impact of coronary angiography as a diagnostic tool for ischemic heart disease, as well as its influence on myocardial revascularization treatment decisions in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction of unknown etiology. According to current recommendations of chronic heart failure guidelines, cardiac catheterization should be considered in the etiological investigation of patients with left ventricular dysfunction in the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease, angina, or refractory symptoms of cardiac failure 8. This study adds value to this issue because it is the implementation of these recommendations in a sample of real life. In the studied population, the coronary angiography confirmed the etiology of ischemic heart disease in 9.3% of patients, but in only 3.7% were therapeutic indications for intervention with coronary revascularization. In separate analysis by subgroups, no patient, among those given only by the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease, presented angiographic criteria consistent with ischemic heart disease. Previous work with cardiac catheterization in patients with heart failure have shown a prevalence of ischemic heart disease ranging between 13% and 65% 4,5,9. These conflicting results may be explained by the lack of uniformity in angiographic criteria for ischemic heart disease and the difference in characteristics in the study population. In the current study we included only patients who remained undiagnosed for ventricular dysfunction after initial evaluation, excluding those with coronary artery disease already established. The inclusion of oligosymptomatic
patients in functional class I and with slightly decreased class ventricular function may also have contributed to the low prevalence of ischemic heart disease in our population. In Brazil there are few data on the prevalence and etiology of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Similar to international samples, ischemic heart disease is the leading cause corresponding to about 32% 3. It notes that the definition used for ischemic heart disease in this study was developed from the concept, widely accepted and quoted in the literature that the ischemic etiology has a worse survival when compared to other forms of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Thus, patients with single-vessel disease and no history of heart attack or coronary artery bypass grafting are classified as nonischemic because they have a better prognosis4,5. Published data show an overall rate of low complication (1.7%) when cardiac catheterization is performed for diagnostic purposes in unselected patients from experientes10 centers. However, patients with dilated cardiomyopathy or symptoms of heart failure are at high risk for complications, increasing the risk by 3.3 and 2.2 times, respectivamente11. The rate of procedure-related complications in the study sample was 2.8%, while only 3.7% of patients have benefited from therapeutic intervention from the information obtained from the coronary angiography. Thus, the rate of complications compared to the potential benefits of the procedure should be considered at the time of indication of the exam. It is known that some patients with myocardial stroke progress to partial or complete recanalization of coronary blamed for the event, leading to coronary angiography to classify them erroneously as a cause of nonischemic cardiomyopathy. In a study of use of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and coronary angiography without obstructive lesions, 13% showed enhancement patterns with late gadolinium those indistinguishable presented in coronariana12 artery disease. On the other hand, the presence of coronary artery disease asymptomatic in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, with no evidence of previous stroke or hibernating myocardium, does not demonstrate causality, especially when other etiologies for heart failure are present (hypertension, alcoholism, myocarditis). The development of severe coronary obstruction was demonstrated in a study with 55 patients undergoing cardiac transplantation with pre-transplant diagnosis of 13 idiopathic
 dilated cardiomyopathy. All patients had angiographically normal coronary arteries over a period of up to 10 years before the transplant and had no history of myocardial infarction. The examination of the explanted heart showed critical injuries in at least one coronary segment in 15 patients (27%) without evidence of myocardial fibrosis. Similar findings were demonstrated in a report of 291 patients with biventricular dysfunction and without a history of stroke who underwent coronary angiography and endomyocardial biopsy symptoms of progressive heart failure. Seven (2.4%) had severe obstructive lesions, but biopsy in all cases showed histological changes with definite criteria for miocardite14. Again, it was not possible to distinguish the dominant etiology of ventricular dysfunction in these patients. The current advance in computed tomography with multiple detectors could provide a noninvasive assessment of coronary anatomy, without loss of specificity of other non-invasive methods. A recent study compared the method with cardiac catheterization in 93 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy finding an accuracy of 95% in the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease compared to cateterism 15. However, this method is of recent application in this population requiring more studies to define its real utility. Finally, the study has some limitations. This is a retrospective assessment subject to the biases inherent in this methodology as to obtain data on the indication of coronary angiography (selection bias) or the presence of symptoms, sometimes underreported (measurement bias). Another limitation is the fact that it is a single-center work with a sample referred to a sub-specialty clinic of a tertiary hospital. Furthermore, the number of patients included in the analysis was relatively small.   Conclusion In our study, the coronary angiography in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction of unknown etiology, although grounded by current guidelines, showed no benefit when indicated only by the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease. Among patients with symptoms of heart failure or refractory angina, coronary angiography reveals to be a good performance tool for the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease. However, even in this population, few were referred for coronary artery bypass procedure.   