 SUMMARY background: THE performance of coronary angiography in heart failure without a defined etiology is often justified for diagnostic evaluation of ischemic heart disease. However, the clinical benefit of this strategy is not known. OBJECTIVE: to Evaluate the prevalence of ischemic heart disease by criteria angiographic in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction without etiology, as well as its impact on the therapeutic decision. METHODS: we evaluated outpatient consecutive with heart failure and systolic dysfunction, who had the coronary angiography indicated for clarification etiological heart disease, in the period 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2010. Patients with a diagnosis of coronary artery disease, serology positive for Chagas disease, congenital heart disease, valvular heart disease severe or patients submitted to heart transplantation were excluded from the analysis. The sample was divided into two groups according to the indication of the catheterization. Group 1: Symptomatic because of angina, or refractory heart failure. Group-2: Presence of > 2 risk factors for coronary artery disease RESULTS: one Hundred and seven patients were included for analysis, 51 of them (47.7%) patients belonging to Group 1 and 56 (52,3%), to Group-2. The prevalence of ischemic heart disease was 9.3% (10 patients), and all belonged to Group-1 (p = 0.0001). During follow-up, only 4 (3,7%) were referred for cabg; 3 (2,8%) patients had complications related to the procedure. CONCLUSION: In our work, the realization of coronary angiography in patients with heart failure and systolic dysfunction without etiology, although supported by current guidelines, showed no benefit when indicated only by the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease. Key words: coronary Angiography/use, left ventricular dysfunction, ischemia miocárdia, heart failure Introduction The ischemic heart disease is responsible for approximately two-thirds of the cases of patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, in the States Unidos1, currently being the main etiology also in Brazil2,3. This etiological differentiation is fundamental in clinical practice for several reasons. Patients with heart failure source ischemic have a worse prognosis when compared to other etiologias4. The potential benefit of revascularization procedures the myocardial and pharmacotherapy in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease is also a key factor that must be considered in the therapeutic decision. Patients with heart failure are considered as having an ischemic etiology when they present with a history of myocardial infarction, procedure of revascularization, or evidence angiográfica of coronary artery disease obstructive, as the publication prévia5. Non-invasive methods to assess myocardial ischemia in this population are of limited use, as the presence of deficits in perfusion and changes in the mobility segment are frequently present in patients with heart diseases do not isquêmicas6,7. Thus, the evaluation of coronary anatomy by cardiac catheterization is considered the procedure of choice for the investigation of ischemic heart disease in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction without etiology definida8. According to the current guidelines of chronic heart failure, one should consider the completion of cardiac catheterization in patients with ventricular dysfunction without a defined etiology in the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease, symptoms of heart failure refractory or angina8. However, the lack of data in the literature on the diagnostic yield of the strategy invasive in this population, in addition to the potential for vascular complications related to the procedure, makes your indication is uncertain. Objective to Evaluate the prevalence of ischemic heart disease by criteria angiographic in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction without a defined etiology according to different indication criteria, as well as its impact on the therapeutic decision. Methods Design cross-sectional Study followed by cohort retrospective. The sample they Analyzed the data of patients seen in the outpatient setting of the surgical treatment of heart failure in a tertiary institution of reference for high-complexity, between 1 January 2009 and 31 December 2010. Have been verified, all angiography coronary elective in this period, being subsequently accessed retrospectively the characteristics of the sample. The variables collected included: data echocardiographic between one year before or after the procedure, with calculation of the ejection fraction of the left ventricle by the method of Teicholz; functional class New York Heart Association; previous diagnosis of systemic arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia (patients on the use of statins or LDL – cholesterol > 160 mg/dL), family history of premature cardiovascular disease (men < 45 years and women < 55 years), chronic renal disease (clearance creatinine estimated < 60 mL/min), smoking-current or within the last 10 years and the presence of coronary artery disease (history of myocardial infarction or revascularization (surgical or percutaneous). Evaluated still the result of serology for Chagas disease (method of imunofluorecência indirect immunoenzymatic test), presence of congenital heart disease or valvular heart disease, in addition to the demographic characteristics. We selected only the patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction that remained without a defined etiology after clinical evaluation non-invasive initial. The inclusion criteria used were: ejection fraction of left ventricle < 45% and age > 18 years. Patients with coronary artery disease, serology positive for Chagas disease, congenital heart disease, valvular heart disease serious or undergoing heart transplant were excluded from the analysis. The sample was divided into two groups according to the criteria for the indication of cardiac catheterization. Group 1: Symptomatic because of angina, or refractory heart failure (i.e. functional class III or IV despite medical treatment optimized) regardless of the profile of risk factors for coronary artery disease. Group 2: Patients without angina, and in functional class I or II with presence of > 2 risk factors for coronary artery disease (age > 45 years for men and 55 years for women; hypercholesterolemia; smoking; systemic arterial hypertension; chronic kidney disease, family history of premature cardiovascular disease or diabetes mellitus). After the procedure patients were classified in patients with an ischemic etiology or non-ischemic. The criteria angiographic used were based on the definitions previously published by Felker and colleagues.5 that considered as an ischemic etiology of the patients with obstructive lesions (> 75%) in two or more vessels, epicardial leads, or in the trunk of the coronary artery or left branch descending previous proximal5. Patients defined as with ischemic heart disease were evaluated for the indication of myocardial revascularization (surgical or percutaneous in the outpatient follow-up in accordance with the discretion of the physician responsible for the case. The starting date of follow-up was the time of the coronary angiography and the last date of follow-up was considered the day of revascularization, or the last outpatient appointment recorded in electronic medical records. Statistical analysis continuous variables were expressed in mean ± standard deviation and were compared by means of Student's t-test. Categorical variables were compared by means of Fisher's exact test. Results In the study period were evaluated 1.970 patients. After the evaluation, outpatient, and initial application of eligibility criteria, only 107 (5,4%) patients had heart failure with systolic dysfunction of the left ventricle etiology not defined, being included for analysis. The demographic data according to the indication of catheterization are expressed in table 1. Fifty-one patients belonged to Group 1 and 56, to the Group-2. The patients had an average of 2.5 (±1,3) risk factors for coronary artery disease, being of 2.3 (±1,4) in Group-1 and 2.7 (±1,2) in Group 2 (p = 0.19). The prevalence of changes angiographic compatible with ischemic heart disease was 9.3% (10 patients) among the 107 patients included, all belonging to Group-1 (p = 0.0001). During follow-up, only 4 (3,7%) had indication for myocardial revascularization (surgical or percutaneous (tab. 2). In the analysis of the patients of Group 1, 19 patients had angina and 32, symptoms of heart failure refractory. The prevalence of ischemic heart disease in these subgroups was 26.3% (5 patients) and 15.6% (5 patients), respectively. Three patients (2,8%) underwent catheterization complications related to the procedure. A patient with occlusion of acute radial artery, another with occlusion of acute brachial artery, and the third with ischemic stroke. All patients were alive until the end of the analysis, and no lost follow-up. The average time of follow-up was 15.6 months (± 7,6). Discussion The present study was the first in our midst to investigate the impact of coronary angiography as a diagnostic tool for ischemic heart disease, as well as its influence on the therapeutic decision for coronary artery bypass grafting in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction without a defined etiology. According to the current recommendations of guidelines of chronic heart failure, the cardiac catheterization should be considered in the research aetiological in patients with left ventricular dysfunction in the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease, angina, or symptoms refractory failure cardíaca8. This study adds value to this question for the case of the application of these recommendations in a sample of real life. In the population studied, the performance of coronary angiography confirmed the ischemic etiology of the heart disease in 9.3% of patients, but in only 3.7% there was indication of a therapeutic intervention with coronary revascularization. In the separate analysis by subgroups, no patient among those indicated only by the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease, presented criteria angiographic compatible with heart disease of ischemic etiology. Previous work with cardiac catheterization in patients with heart failure demonstrate a prevalence of ischemic heart disease, which varies between 13% and 65%4,5,9. These divergent results can be explained by the absence of uniformity in the criteria angiographic to ischemic heart disease and by the difference in the characteristics in the studied population. In the present study, we included only patients who remained without etiological diagnosis for the ventricular dysfunction after the initial assessment, excluding those with coronary artery disease is already established. The inclusion of patients oligossintomáticos in functional class I and with ventricular function quietly reduced it may also have contributed to the low prevalence of ischemic heart disease in our population. In Brazil there are few data on the prevalence and etiology of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Similar to the case-by-case international, the ischemic cardiopathy is the main cause accounting for about 32%3. It is important to note that the definition used in ischemic heart disease in this study was developed from the concept, widely accepted and cited in the literature that the ischemic etiology has a worse survival rate when compared to other forms of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Thus, patients with lesions uniarteriais and without a history of infarction or revascularization of the myocardium are classified as non-ischemic for experiencing a better prognóstico4,5. Literature data show a global rate of complications low (1,7%) when the cardiac catheterization is carried out with the purpose of the diagnostic in patients not selected from centers experientes10. However, patients with dilated cardiomyopathy or symptoms of heart failure are at high risk for complications, increasing the risk by 3.3 and 2.2 times, respectivamente11. The rate of complications related to the procedure in the sample studied was 2.8%, while only 3.7% of the patients were provided with a therapeutic intervention from the information obtained with coronary angiography. In this way, the rate of complications compared with the potential benefit of the procedure must be considered at the time of the indication of the examination. It is known that some patients who have myocardial infarction evolve with reconnect the vans partial or total coronary blame for the event, leading to coronary angiography to classify them wrongly as a cause of non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. In a study with use of magnetic resonance imaging in cardiac patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and coronary angiogram without obstructive lesions, 13% had patterns highlight late with gadolinium indistinguishable from those presented in the arterial disease coronariana12. On the other hand, the presence of coronary artery disease asymptomatic patients with dilated cardiomyopathy without evidence of previous infarction or myocardial wintering, does not demonstrate causal relationship, especially when other etiologies for heart failure are present (systemic arterial hypertension, alcohol consumption, myocarditis). The development of the obstruction is coronary severe was demonstrated in a study with 55 patients who underwent heart transplantation with pre-transplant dilated cardiomyopathy idiopática13. All patients had coronary angiograficamente in a normal period of up to 10 years before the transplantation and had no history of myocardial infarction. The examination of the heart explantado revealed injuries critical in at least one segment of the coronary artery in 15 patients (27%) without evidence of myocardial fibrosis. Similar findings were demonstrated in a report of 291 patients with dysfunction biventricular and without a history of infarction who underwent coronary angiography and biopsy endomiocárdica by symptoms of heart failure progressive. Seven (2,4%) had obstructive lesions important, but the biopsy in all cases showed histological alterations with definite criteria for miocardite14. Again, it was not possible to distinguish the etiology predominant ventricular dysfunction in these patients. The current advancement in computed tomography with multiple detectors could provide an evaluation of noninvasive the coronary anatomy without the loss of specificity of the other non-invasive methods. A recent study compared the method with the cardiac catheterization in 93 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy found an overall accuracy of 95% in the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease when compared to the cateterismo15. However, this method is of recent application in this population necessitating the need for larger studies to define its real usefulness. Finally, the study has some limitations. This is a retrospective assessment is subject to biases inherent to this methodology of obtaining data on the indication of coronary angiography (selection bias) or the presence of symptoms, often underreported (bias assessment). Another limitation is the fact of whether you have a job unicêntrico with a sample referred to a clinic sub-specialty tertiary care hospital. In addition, the number of patients included in the analysis was relatively reduced. Conclusion In our work, the realization of coronary angiography in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction without a defined etiology, although supported by current guidelines, showed no benefit when indicated only by the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease. Among the patients with symptoms of refractory heart failure or angina, a coronary angiography proved to be an instrument of good income for the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease. However, even in this population, few have had indication of procedure coronary artery bypass grafting. 