OBJECTIVE: To describe the fluoroscopic findings of newborn swallowing zero pre-term six months old, as well as the clinical disease and the signs and symptoms related to swallowing disorders, and compare them with the relevant data from term newborns. METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed data from fluoroscopic evaluations performed in one year in infants from zero to six months of age and their medical records. We had 40 individuals participanting, divided into two groups: Pre-term, consisting of 23 newly born preterm; and Term Group, composed by 17 infants born to term. RESULTS: The main fluoroscopic swallowing findings  observed in both groups were the nasopharynx and the gastroesophageal reflux. There was no difference between groups for the presence of swallowing disorders. The Pre-term group showed more heart problems than the term group. There was no difference between groups for neurological and respiratory problems. In relation to clinical signs and suggestive symptoms of swallowing disorders, the Pre-term group showed more oxygen desaturation and the Term Group more vomiting. CONCLUSION: The main fluoroscopic findings of swallowing found in newborns zero pre-term six months of age were reflux into the nasopharynx and gastroesophageal reflux. New follow-up studies of this population should be conducted to confirm the hypothesis that the changes observed in swallowing occurred due to immaturity in swallowing function. Keywords: Fluoroscopy, Newborn, Premature, Swallowing disorders, Gastroesophageal reflux INTRODUCTION The establishment of intensive care in neonatal units, together with the advance of technological development of obstetric and perinatal medicine, resulted in increased survival rates for high-risk infants, mainly in the last two decades(1). With longer survival, the focus of the studies has been the assessment of neonatal morbidity and its consequences, especially in newborn pre-term infants (PTI) (2). The literature reports that pre-term infants, in addition to being more likely to develop neurological, cardiac and/or respiratory disorders may present swallowing disorders (3). However, there are few studies that describe the swallowing disorders in this population using fluoroscopic evaluation. The oral feeding in infants is a complex activity that requires an efficient coordination of the sucking functions, breathing and swallowing, so there is no effort and/or risk of aspiration (4). However, such coordination is only possible around the 32nd to the 34th week of gestation (4.5), while the 34th is often used as the minimum expectation limit for sufficient oral intake to meet the nutritional and water needs (6). Generally, the exclusive power capacity is achieved orally after 37 weeks of gestational age (7). In pre-term infants, the coordination of sucking, swallowing and breathing can be altered by both neurological immaturity as the presence of cardiac and/or respiratory disorders. In addition, abnormal muscle tone, altered oral reflexes and the difficulty in regulating the organization states can hinder the performance in relation to oral skills and swallowing (8,9). Thus, pre-term infants need an alternative route feed to acquire the necessary skills to feed orally (7). However, lengthen dependence on this alternative pathway increases the possibility of sensory deprivation and impairs the initial development of power, stopping sequences and appetitive ingestive behaviors that compose important learning experiences (9). In addition, many pre-term infants present breathing problems that require oxygen support. The development of rhythmic oral patterns for suction may be impaired in these children, it is routinely subjected to abnormal tactile stimulation in perioral and intraoral sensitive tissues during periods of endotracheal intubation and the use of continuous positive airway pressure (4). The coordination of sucking, swallowing and breathing is obtained when the child can ingest the diet through the mouth safely and effectively, that is, without the risk of aspiration. This coordination is evidenced by the absence of change on the physiological parameters such as oxygen desaturation, respiratory distress, apnea, bradycardia or tachycardia, and demonstration of a 1: 1: 1 or 2: 2: 1 for sucking: swallowing: respiration (4). During feedings, the pre-term infants are significantly less efficient than infants born to term (RNT), they present alternative failures and efforts to protect the airways and periods of apnea during vigorous sucking, not showing the sequence of 1: 1: 1 consistent sucking, swallowing and breathing observed in FTN (8). Therefore, during oral feeding this population may experience episodes of desaturation, apnea and/or bradycardia (4), clinical signs suggestive of change in the swallowing dynamics. The main signs and symptoms that may indicate swallowing disorders are: weight loss, poor feeding, irritability, cough, regurgitation, choking, respiratory distress, stridor, cyanosis, apnea, oxygen desaturation, bradycardia and recurrent respiratory infections, mostly pneumonia (10-12). In such cases, they oral preparatory phase, oral, pharyngeal and/or esophageal swallowing (10) may be altered. Furthermore, these signs and symptoms may also indicate the presence of gastroesophageal reflux (GER) (13,14). The incidence of GERD in preterm infants is ranging from 22% to 85% (13). In pre-term infants, pharyngeal stimulation caused by episodes of gastroesophageal reflux, causes reflex bradycardia and breathing cessation, rather than swallowing and cough as occur in FTN (15). Some studies have tried to show the relationship between the presence of GER, apnea and bradycardia in pre-term infants, but the results are controversial. Some studies show that there is a correlation between them (15,16), while others do not corroborate these findings (17,18). Videofluoroscopy or videodeglutogram is the "gold standard" method of objective evaluation of swallowing. It allows to evaluate both the structures and the details of the swallowing phases and the dynamics between them, which is not only possible with the clinical evaluation. Thus: velofaríngica competence, pharyngeal transit time, premature escape and/or food stasis in valecule or piriform, laryngeal elevation and laryngeal penetration and/or aspiration before, during or after swallowing (silent or not) can be observed. The transit of the stomach esophagus cake and detected the presence of GERD, and laryngeal penetration and / or aspiration of gastric contents (6,10,11,19,20) can also be observed. With the video fluoroscopy, temporal event measures related to the dynamics of swallowing, and oral transit time, early laryngeal closure, the arrival time of the cake to the valecule, pharyngeal delay, pharyngeal transit and upper esophageal sphincter opening can also be obtained. These measures can help alterations in swallowing  identification and develop an appropriate treatment plan. However, there are few studies that evaluate these measures and seek to standardize them in the pediatric population (21). Changes in swallowing and aspiration is a common cause of problems related to food in childhood (12). Studies show that videofluoroscopy is a method that detects the aspiration, silent or not, and identify what changes swallowing properly, which allows you to plan the therapeutic program and establish compensatory mechanisms (12,22,23). Newborns show abnormalities in videofluoroscopy as nasopharyngeal reflux, laryngeal penetration and aspiration, including a high incidence of silent aspiration. This emphasizes the importance of objective evaluation of swallowing in this population (20). Children with respiratory problems may have changes in swallowing, which can be observed in videofluoroscopy (22, 24-26). According to some authors, swallowing disorders are frequently observed in infants under one year of age with a history of bronchitis and / or recurrent pneumonia. In addition, these changes may be the cause of respiratory symptoms in this population (22). In a study of children with pneumonia, there was a correlation between the disease and the presence of residues in the pharynx after swallowing, fluid aspiration and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) (24). Other research has shown that swallowing disorders characterized by aspiration occurred in the acute phase of bronchiolitis in previously healthy children, though they do not show clinical signs of such changes (25). In a children survey with no apparent risk factors associated with swallowing and breathing problems without cause, it was observed that these have swallowing disorders characterized by delayed onset of pharyngeal phase. In the study, this delay always preceded the laryngeal penetration or aspiration, and 100% of the aspirations were silent. Therefore, the oropharyngeal dysphagia should be considered in the differential diagnosis of this population (26). In children with severe neurological disorders, changes in oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing, resulting in vacuum, are the leading cause of respiratory tract infections (11). Children with GERD may also experience changes in swallowing and feeding difficulties. Authors conducted a videofluoroscopy in 11 children with GERD and observed that are prevalent changes in oral and oral preparatory phase, especially with solid food. Moreover, silent aspiration was observed in 18.2% of the children and delayed esophageal transit in 36.4% (27). GER associated to suction can increase the incidence of respiratory tract infections. Study showed that children with severe neurological disorders associated with gastroesophageal reflux and aspiration are more likely to have severe infections of the respiratory tract. The GER with no alterations on the swallowing resulting in vacuum has a lower risk of causing respiratory tract infections in this population (11). As in adults, children who have suffered traumatic brain injury may also have swallowing disorders in the acute phase. Authors conducted a videofluoroscopy in 18 children in the moderate/severe head trauma post-acute phase. They observed the following changes: a reduced lingual control, language hesitation movement, the presence of aspiration (including silent), delayed swallowing reflex shooting, closing and reduced laryngeal elevation, and decreased peristalsis (28). Based on the above, the importance of holding the fluoroscopic evaluation in children with signs and symptoms that indicate changes in the swallowing in order to characterize them objectively and thus devise an appropriate treatment plan is highlighted. It was not found in the literature any specific study on fluoroscopic evaluation of swallowing in preterm infants. The objective of this study was to describe the fluoroscopic findings of zero preterm infants six months of age swallowing, as well as diseases and clinical signs and symptoms related to swallowing disorders, and compare them with their RNT's data.   METHODS This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the University Hospital of the University of São Paulo (HU-USP), under number 830/08. It is about the retrospective analysis of fluoroscopic review database held from September/2007 to September/2008 in infants from zero to six months of age, Radiology sector HU-USP. From medical records the following data were studied: date of birth, gestational age (GA), birth weight (BW), gender, peri- and post-natal disease and clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of changes in the oral phase, pharyngeal and esophageal swallowing (reason for the indication for fluoroscopic evaluation). The observed diseases were divided into three groups: neurological problems (mild perinatal asphyxia/moderate hydrocephalus and brain trauma), heart (patent foramen ovale, patent ductus arteriosus and functional blow) and respiratory, which were subdivided into specific diagnoses (discomfort early respiratory, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, respiratory distress syndrome, hyaline membrane disease, bronchiolitis, bronchopneumonia, chronic laryngitis and vocal cord paresis) and clinical signs (apnea, cough, dyspnoea, stridor, wheezing and wheezing). In respiratory problems was also considered possible historical and duration of the endotracheal intubation. As for selection, they were included the medical records of infants from zero to six months of age underwent fluoroscopic evaluation from September/2007 to September/2008 in the radiology industry HU-USP. The medical records of infants were excluded if they had not performed the oral and/or pharyngeal swallowing during fluoroscopic evaluation due to the presence of craniofacial abnormalities, genetic syndromes, severe perinatal asphyxia and / or use of alternative means of power and the records whose reports of the examinations were unavailable hospital system. From September / 2007 to September / 2008, 44 infants from zero to six months of age underwent to a fluoroscopic evaluation. However, four were excluded because they did not meet the criteria adopted in this research. Soon the records of 40 newborns were included, which were divided into two groups: Pre-Term Group (GPT), consisting of 23 preterm infants (IG mean = 32.5 weeks; mean PN = 1805g); and Term Group (WG) consisting of 17 RNT (IG mean = 39.7 weeks; mean PN = 3211g). The age of the infants was four days and maximum age of five months and 19 days. It was considered the corrected age of preterm infants. The examinations were performed with Phillips® DuoDiagnostic's equipment, collimated field in the area of interest, with exposure parameters automatically set by ionization chamber where it gets the best picture fluoroscopic with the lowest radiation dose. For recording the fluoroscopic swallowing, infants were positioned in the supine position with compressive band, allowing the retention safely and side view, getting as close as possible to the table top and the intensifier, avoiding this way, distortions of the fluoroscopic image. The contrast was provided in the nozzle orthodontic NUK® mark with hole for thin liquid, and used a dilution of 50% barium sulfate to 100% (Bariogel®) and 50% of the total volume heated milk prescribed by the physician neonatologist. The focus of the fluoroscopic image was defined in the anterior region by the lips, in the upper region through the nasal cavity, the posterior region of the cervical spine and the lower region of the airway bifurcation and cervical esophagus. For the RGE research, the infants were positioned supine, having to wait for about five minutes, using scopy intermittently, to obtain the lowest radiation exposure possible. We considered swallowing disorders in fluoroscopic evaluation: a contrast presence in nasopharynx during swallowing, residual presence in piriform, laryngeal penetration and tracheal aspiration. Furthermore, it was also observed the possible presence of GERD and its respective height. For the statistical analysis the Two Proportions Equality Test was used, in groups comparisons and Fisher's exact test to verify the association between swallowing disorders, GERD, clinical disease and signs and symptoms related to swallowing disorders. In this study, we adopted a 0.05 significance level.   RESULTS It was observed in the GPT, a higher frequency of heart disease than in the GT (p = 0.040). There was no difference between groups for neurological and respiratory problems. In relation to specific diagnosis, there was a difference in the GPT respiratory problems for the following: early respiratory distress (p = 0.012), BPD (p = 0.012) and apnea (p = 0.040). Comparing the groups regarding the clinical signs and symptoms of swallowing disorders and GERD, the GPT had higher occurrence of oxygen desaturation (p = 0.001) and the GT vomiting (p = 0.038). Only GPT presented nausea, bradycardia, respiratory distress and difficulty in sucking; only GT presented choking and nasal obstruction. These signals were separately observed in the groups. There was no difference between the groups as for cyanosis, regurgitation, cough, lack of appetite and food apnea (Table 1). There was no difference between the groups in regards to the presence of alterations in the oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing (p = 0.720) and RGE (p = 0.631). The main swallowing disorders presented in both groups was reflux to the nasopharynx, and there was no tracheal aspiration or presence of residue in the piriform. Only one PN showed laryngeal penetration and higher occurrence of GERD to proximal third of the esophagus and into the oral cavity in both groups (Table 2). In total, 32.5% of the individuals had swallowing disorders (reflux into nasopharynx = 100% penetration and laryngeal = 7.7%) and 80% RGE (predominant height in the proximal third of the esophagus = 50% and to the oral cavity = 25%). To verify the association between swallowing disorders with neurological, cardiac and respiratory problems (Table 3) as well as clinical signs and symptoms (Table 4), there were differences in the neurological (p = 0.043). There was no association between change in the oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing and presence of GERD (Table 5). The association between the presence of GERD with neurological, cardiac and respiratory problems and with clinical signs and symptoms showed no difference (Table 5).   DISCUSSION In this study, the main changes observed in swallowing, in both groups, were reflux into the nasopharynx and gastroesophageal reflux. The reflux into the nasopharynx is a incoordination signal swallowing during the pharyngeal phase caused by inefficient elevation of the soft palate. As newborns are obligatory nasal breathers, the number os secretions increased in the nasopharynx due to this change can hinder the pace of sucking, swallowing (22). Some authors consider minimum reflux for nasopharyngeal and laryngeal penetrations as normal in newborns because these changes may be physiological in this population due to the immaturity in swallowing function (12). Thus, it can be considered that reflux into the nasopharynx, observed in the study population, was due to the immaturity in swallowing function, which causes lack of coordination in it. However, new studies, especially of follow-up of this population should be conducted to confirm this hypothesis. The incoordination between sucking, swallowing and breathing can cause penetration and/or tracheal aspiration in neonates (22). In preterm infants, it may be due to neurological immaturity and the presence of heart disease and/or respiratory (8). In this study, only one PN showed laryngeal penetration. The occurrence of GERD in the child is common, especially in the first 18 months of age, when the immaturity in the control of the various phases of swallowing and coordination of peristaltic waves is evident (29). In this study there was a high incidence (80%) of GERD in this population, which corroborates the literature (13,29). Children with GERD may experience changes in oral and pharyngeal phases of swallowing and feeding difficulties (27). However, in this study, there was no relationship between the presence of gastroesophageal reflux and swallowing disorders in the oral and pharyngeal phases. In this study, preterm infants showed more heart problems than the RNT. In addition, higher frequency was observed in early respiratory distress, bronchodysplasia and apnea in this population. This finding confirms studies showing that the preterm infants are more likely to have such problems (3). Clinical signs and symptoms that were the reason for the assessment of fluoroscopic indication in this study are the same as described in the literature (10-14). The highest incidence of oxygen desaturation, bradycardia and respiratory distress in preterm infants may be due to the fact that they presented more respiratory and heart problems; the lack of coordination between sucking, swallowing and breathing related to prematurity (4.7); or the high incidence of GERD, although the literature is controversial about the relationship between GER and clinical signs and symptoms (15-18). The suction difficulty observed only in preterm infants may be related to neurological immaturity that this population has, as described in the literature (8). It is believed that nasal obstruction observed in both the RNT is due to the reflux for nasopharyngeal observed in fluoroscopic evaluation for the presence of respiratory problems. Vomiting after eating is one of the manifestations of GERD (30). In this study, there was a higher incidence of vomiting in the RNT. By correlating clinical signs and symptoms with swallowing disorders in the oral and pharyngeal stages and RGE, no difference was found. The literature reports that GERD can stimulate receptors located primarily in the pharynx and larynx and trigger reflex mechanisms that can generate acute cardiorespiratory symptoms such as bronchospasm, laryngospasm, central apnea and bradycardia, which may cause cyanosis (29). In addition, there were differences in the relationship between swallowing disorders and neurological problems. Children with neurological disorders, including traumatic brain injury, may have swallowing disorders (11,28).   CONCLUSION The main fluoroscopic findings of swallowing found in preterm infants from birth to six months of age were reflux into the nasopharynx and gastroesophageal reflux. Moreover, this population had more heart problems than the RNT. In relation to clinical signs and symptoms related to swallowing disorders, the preterm infants have a higher incidence of oxygen desaturation.  The audiologist must be aware of the swallowing evaluation of newborns with neurological, respiratory and/or cardiac and/or are premature problems, because these are risk factors for swallowing disorders, and, when possible and indicated, to complement clinical evaluation with fluoroscopic evaluation. New follow-up studies of this population should be conducted to confirm the hypothesis that swallowing disorders observed in this study were due to immaturity in the swallowing function. In addition, further prospective studies with larger samples are needed to a better understanding of the normal physiology of swallowing in infants.   