 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Describe the findings fluoroscópicos of swallowing in newborn pre-term of zero to six months of age, as well as the diseases and the clinical signs and symptoms related to the change in swallowing, and compare them with the respective data obtained in full-term newborn babies. METHODS: we analyzed, retrospectively, the data of the assessments fluoroscopic carried out in the period of one year in infants zero to six months of age, and at their medical records. Participated in 40 subjects, divided into two groups: preterm Group, consisting of 23 newly-born pre-term; and Term Group, consisting of 17 full-term newborn babies. RESULTS: The major findings fluoroscópicos of swallowing observed in both groups were reflux to the nasopharynx and reflux gastresofágico. There was no difference between the groups for the presence of alteration in swallowing . The preterm Group presented more heart problems than the Term Group. There was no difference between the groups for neurological problems and respiratory. In relation to the clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of change in swallowing, the preterm Group presented more desaturation of oxygen, and the Term Group more vomiting. CONCLUSION: The main findings fluoroscópicos of deglutition found in the newly-born pre-term of zero to six months of age were reflux to the nasopharynx and reflux gastresofágico. New follow-up studies of this population should be performed to confirm the hypothesis that the changes in swallowing observed occurred due to the immaturity in function of swallowing. Keywords: Fluoroscopy, Newborn, Premature, Disorders of swallowing, Reflux gastresofágico INTRODUCTION THE establishment of intensive care in neonatal units, in addition to the advancement of the technological development of medicine obstetric and perinatal care, has resulted in increased rates of survival for babies of high-risk, especially in the last two decades(1). With greater survival, the focus of the studies has been the evaluation of morbidity in the neonatal and its consequences, especially in the newly born pre-term (preterm infants)(2). The literature reports that preterm newborns, also, they are more likely to develop neurological disorders, cardiac and/or respiratory, can display changes in swallowing(3). However, there are few studies that describe the changes of swallowing in this population using the evaluation fluoroscopic. Feeding by the oral route in newborns is a complex activity that requires an efficient coordination of the functions of sucking, breathing and swallowing, so there is no effort and/or risk of aspiration(4). However, this co-ordination, it only begins to be possible around the 32nd to 34th week of gestational age(4,5), although the 34th is often used as a minimum threshold of expectation for oral intake sufficient to meet the nutritional needs and water(6). Generally, the ability to feed exclusively by mouth is reached after the 37th week of gestational age(7). In preterm newborns, the coordination between sucking, swallowing and breathing can be changed both by the immaturity in the neurological as well as for the presence of alterations of cardiac and/or respiratory. In addition, the muscle tone abnormal reflexes oral changed, and the difficulty to regulate the states of the organization may hinder the performance in relation to oral skills and swallowing(8,9). Thus, the preterm infants in need of this alternative route of supply to acquire the skills necessary to feed orally(7). However, the long-term dependence on this alternative route increases the possibility of sensory deprivation and impairs the early development of the power, interrupting sequences of behaviors apetitivos and ingestivos that make up important learning experiences(9). In addition, many preterm infants have respiratory problems that require support of oxygen. The development of patterns of oral rhythmic for the suction may be impaired in these children who are routinely subject to tactile stimulation is abnormal in the tissues sensitive periorais and oral during periods of endotracheal intubation and use of continuous positive airway pressure in the airways(4). The coordination of sucking-swallowing-breathing is achieved when the child can eat diet by mouth safely and effectively, without the risk of aspiration. This coordination is evidenced by the absence of change of physiological parameters such as desaturation of oxygen, respiratory distress, apnea, bradycardia, or tachycardia, and demonstration of a ratio of 1:1:1 or 2:2:1 for sucking: swallowing: breathing(4). During feedings, preterm infants are significantly less efficient than the full-term newborn babies (RNT), because they have failures and efforts alternative to protect the airways and periods of apnea during the suction vigorous, showing the sequence of 1:1:1 consistent suction, swallowing and breathing observed in RNT(8). Soon, during the oral nutrition this population may present episodes of desaturation, apnea and/or bradycardia(4) clinical signs suggestive of changes in the dynamics of swallowing. The main signs and symptoms that may indicate change in swallowing are: weight loss, refusal of food, irritation, coughing, regurgitation, choking, respiratory discomfort, estridor, cyanosis, apnea, desaturation of oxygen, bradycardia, and recurrent respiratory infections, mainly pneumonia(10-12). In these cases, may be changed the phases, the preparatory, oral, oral, pharyngeal and/or esophageal swallowing(10). In addition, these signs and symptoms may also indicate the presence of reflux gastresofágico (RGE)(13,14). The incidence of GERD in preterm infants varies from 22% to 85%(13). In preterm infants, the stimulation pharyngeal due to episodes of GERD, causes the interrupt reflex of breathing and bradycardia, rather than swallowing and coughing as they occur in the NTS(15). Some studies seek to show the relationship between the presence of GERD, apnea and bradycardia in preterm infants, but the results are controversial. Some studies show that there is a correlation between them(15,16), while others do not corroborate these findings(17,18). The videofluoroscopia or videodeglutograma is the method the "gold standard" of objective assessment of swallowing. Allows to evaluate both the structures and the details of the phases of swallowing and the dynamic between them, which is not possible only with the clinical evaluation. So, it may be observed: competence velofaríngica, transit time faríngeo, escape premature and/or stasis of food in the valécula or recesses boules, larynx elevation and penetration larynx and/or aspiration before, during or after swallowing (silent or not). Also can be observed the transit of the cake from the esophagus to the stomach and detected the presence of GERD, as well as penetration larynx and/or aspiration of gastric contents(6,10,11,19,20). With the videofluoroscopia can also be obtained from measures of temporal events related to the dynamics of swallowing, such as transit time oral, the beginning of the closing laryngeal, time of arrival of the cake to the valécula, delay faríngeo, transit faríngeo and opening of the esophageal sphincter upper. These measures can help in the identification of changes in swallowing and in the preparation of a planning appropriate therapeutic. However, there are few studies that evaluate these measures and seek to customize them in the pediatric population(21). Changes in swallowing with aspiration is a common cause of difficulties related to eating in childhood(12). Studies show that the videofluoroscopia is a method that detects the aspiration, silent or not, and identifies the proper manner in which the changes of swallowing, which allows you to plan the therapeutic program and to establish the compensatory mechanisms(12,22,23). Newborn infants show abnormalities in the videofluoroscopia as reflux nasopharyngeal, penetration larynx, and aspiration, including a high incidence of aspiration is silent. This emphasizes the importance of objective assessment of swallowing in this population(20). Children with respiratory problems may show changes in swallowing, which can be observed in the assessment videofluoroscópica(22, 24-26). According to some authors, changes in swallowing are frequently observed in infants under one year of age with a history of bronchitis and/or pneumonias and recurrent. In addition, these changes may be the cause of respiratory symptoms in this population(22). In a study with children with pneumonia, there was a correlation between the disease and the presence of residues in the pharynx after swallowing, aspiration of liquids and reflux disease gastresofágico (GERD)(24). Other research has shown that changes in swallowing characterized by aspiration occurred in the acute phase of bronchiolitis in infants previously healthy, in spite of them not showing clinical signs suggestive of such changes(25). In a research with children with no risk factors apparent associated to swallowing and breathing problems without a cause, it was observed that these feature changes in swallowing characterized by delay in the onset of phase pharyngeal. In the study, this delay always preceded penetration or aspiration larynx, being that 100% of aspirations were silent. Soon, the dysphagia oropharyngeal should be considered in the differential diagnosis of this population(26). In children with neurological disorders-severe, changes in the phases of the oral and pharyngeal of swallowing, resulting in aspiration, are the main cause of respiratory tract infections(11). Children with GERD may also have changes in swallowing, and difficulties in feeding. Authors conducted videofluoroscopia in 11 children with GERD and have observed that are the predominant changes in the phases preparatory and oral-oral, especially with solid food. In addition, they observed a suction silent 18.2% of children and delay in transit disease in 36.4% of subjects(27). The GERD-associated aspiration may increase the incidence of respiratory tract infections. The study showed that children with neurological disorders severe associated with GERD and aspiration are more likely to have infections severe respiratory tract. The GERD no changes in swallowing resulting in aspiration has a lower risk of causing infections in the respiratory tract in this population(11). As well as in adults, children who have suffered trauma cranioencefálico may also exhibit changes in swallowing in the acute phase. Authors conducted videofluoroscopia in 18 children in the acute phase post-trauma cranioencefálico moderate/severe. They observed the following changes: control lingual reduced, movement of the hesitation of the tongue, the presence of aspiration (including silent), delay in the triggering of the swallowing reflex, closure and larynx elevation reduced, and peristaltic motion decreased(28). Based on the foregoing, it is evident the importance of the completion of the evaluation fluoroscopy in children with signs and symptoms that indicate changes in swallowing with the purpose of characterize them objectively and, thus, to delineate a planning appropriate therapeutic. Was not found in the literature no specific study on evaluation fluoroscopic swallowing in preterm infants. Thus, the aim of this study was to describe the findings fluoroscópicos of swallowing in preterm infants zero to six months of age, as well as the diseases and the clinical signs and symptoms related to the change in swallowing, and compare them with the respective data obtained from the NTS. METHODS This research was approved by the Ethics Committee and Research of the Hospital Universitário of University of São Paulo (HU-USP), under the number 830/08. This is retrospective analysis of data from evaluations fluoroscopic carried out in the period September/2007 to September/2008 in infants zero to six months of age, in the Radiology sector of the HU-USP. Have been raised in the medical records the following data: date of birth, gestational age (GA), birth weight (PN), gender, complications peri-and post-natal diseases and clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of changes in the phases oral, pharyngeal and esophageal swallowing (reason indication for the completion of the evaluation, fluoroscopic). The diseases observed were divided into three groups: neurological problems (asphyxia, perinatal mild/moderate, hydrocephalus and trauma cranioencefálico), heart (patent foramen ovale, patent ductus arteriosus, and blow-functional), and respiratory, all of which have been subdivided into specific diagnoses (respiratory distress early, broncodisplasia lung, respiratory distress syndrome, disease of the membranes hialinas, bronchiolitis, broncopneumonia, laryngitis and chronic paresis of the vocal folds) and clinical signs (apnea, cough, dyspnea, estridor, wheezing, and wheezing). In respiratory problems was also considered possible history and duration of endotracheal intubation. As to the selection, were included in the medical records of all infants zero to six months of age submitted to the evaluation of fluoroscopic in the period from September/2007 to September/2008 in the Radiology sector of the HU-USP. Were excluded the medical records of all infants who had not conducted the oral and/or pharyngeal swallowing during the evaluation, fluoroscopic due to the presence of craniofacial anomalies, genetic syndromes, asfixias severe perinatal and/or use of alternative power and medical records whose medical reports of the examinations performed were unavailable the hospital system. In the period from September/2007 to September/2008, 44 infants zero to six months of age were submitted to evaluation, fluoroscopic. However, four were excluded since it did not correspond to the criteria adopted in this research. Soon, we included the charts of 40 newborns, which were divided into two groups: preterm Group (GPT), consisting of 23 preterm infants (mean GA = 32.5 weeks; mean bw = 1805g); and Term Group (WG), composed of 17 RNT (mean GA = at 39.7 weeks; mean bw = 3211g). The minimum age of the infants was four days and a maximum of five months and 19 days. Was not considered the corrected age of preterm infants. The examinations were performed with equipment Phillips® DuoDiagnostic, field collimated in the area of interest, with exposure parameters set automatically through the ionization chamber where you get the best fluoroscopic image with the lowest radiation dose. For the recording of the fluoroscopy of deglutition, the infants were positioned in the decubitus position, high-band compressor, enabling the retention of a safe way, and in the side view, getting as close as possible to the top of the table and the intensifier, thus avoiding, in this way, distortion of the fluoroscopic image. The contrast was offered in the orthodontic nipple of the brand NUK® with hole for thin liquid, and used in a dilution of 50% of barium sulphate to 100% (Bariogel®) and 50% of milk heated in the total volume prescribed by the physician neonatologista. The focus of the fluoroscopic image was delimited in the region earlier by the lips, in the upper region through the nasal cavity, in the posterior region by the cervical spine and in the lower region by the bifurcation of the airway and cervical esophageal. For the research of GERD, the infants were positioned in supine, with a wait of approximately five minutes, using escopia intermittently, in order to obtain the smallest exposure to radiation can. Have been considered as modification of the swallowing evaluation, fluoroscopic: presence of contrast in the nasopharynx during swallowing, the presence of residue in the recesses boules, penetration larynx and aspiration laringotraqueal. In addition, it was also observed the possible presence of GERD and its respective height. For the statistical analysis were utilized the Test of Equality of Two Proportions in the comparison between groups and the Fisher's Exact Test to verify association between changes of swallowing, GERD, diseases and clinical signs and symptoms related to the change in swallowing. In this study, we adopted a significance level of 0.05. RESULTS it was Observed, in the GPT, the higher frequency of heart problems than in GT (p=0.040). There was no difference between the groups for neurological problems and respiratory. In relation to specific diagnoses, there was a difference in the GPT for the following respiratory problems: respiratory distress early (p=0.012), broncodisplasia (p=0.012), and apnea (p=0.040). Comparing the groups regarding the clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of alteration of swallowing and GERD, the GPT showed higher occurrence of desaturation of oxygen (p=0.001) and the GT of vomiting (p=0.038). Only GPT presented nausea, bradycardia, respiratory distress and difficulty sucking; only GT presented choking and nasal obstruction. These signs were observed in the groups separately. There was no difference between the groups in regard to cyanosis, regurgitation, cough, loss of appetite feeding and apnea (Table 1). There was no difference between the groups with regard to the presence of change in the phases of oral and pharyngeal swallowing (p=0,720) and RGE (p=0,631) . The main change of swallowing appear in both groups was reflux into the nasopharynx, and there was no suction laringotraqueal or the presence of residue in the recesses boules. Only one preterm newborn showed penetration larynx, and there was a higher occurrence of GERD until the third proximal of the esophagus and to the oral cavity in both groups (Table 2). In total, 32.5% of the subjects had change of swallowing (reflux into nasopharynx=100% penetration and larynx=7,7%) and 80% RGE (height predominant in the third proximal of the esophagus=50% and the oral cavity=25%). To verify the association between change in swallowing with neurological problems, cardiac and respiratory conditions (Table 3), as well as with clinical signs and symptoms (Table 4), there was a difference for the neurological (p=0.043). There was no association between change in the phases of oral and pharyngeal swallowing and the presence of GERD (Table 5). The association between the presence of GERD with neurological problems, cardiac and respiratory, with clinical signs and symptoms showed no difference (Table 5). DISCUSSION In the present study, the main changes observed in swallowing, in both groups, were reflux to the nasopharynx and reflux gastresofágico. The reflux to the nasopharynx is a sign of incoordination in the swallowing during the phase pharyngeal caused by a rise in the inefficient of the velum palatinum. As newborn babies are respirators nasal required, the increase of secretions in the nasopharynx because of this change may hamper the pace of sucking-swallowing(22). Some authors consider minimum flows to the nasopharynx and penetrations propagators as normal in newborns, because these changes can be physiological in this population due to the immaturity in function of swallowing(12). Thus, one can consider that the reflux to the nasopharynx, as observed in the population of this study, occurred due to the immaturity in function of swallowing, which causes an incoordination in the same. However, new studies, especially follow-up of this population, should be performed for the confirmation of such a hypothesis. The incoordination between the suction-swallowing-breathing can cause penetration and/or aspiration laringotraqueal in newborns(22). In preterm infants, it can occur due to the immaturity in the neurological and the presence of heart problems and/or breathing(8). In this research, only one preterm newborn showed penetration larynx. The occurrence of GERD in children is frequent, especially in the first 18 months of age, when the immaturity in the control of the various stages of swallowing and in the coordination of the waves peristaltic is evident(29). In the present study there was a high incidence (80%) of GERD in the study population, which corroborates data from the literature(13,29). Children with GERD may present with changes in the phases of the oral and pharyngeal of swallowing and feeding difficulty(27). However, in the present study, there was no relationship between the presence of GERD, and alteration of the swallowing phases of the oral and pharyngeal. In this study, the preterm infants showed more heart problems than the RNT. In addition, we observed a higher frequency of respiratory distress early, broncodisplasia and episodes of apnea in this population. This corroborates studies which show that preterm infants are more likely to exhibit such problems(3). The clinical signs and symptoms that were the reason for the indication of the evaluation fluoroscopic in this study are the same as described in the literature(10-14). The higher incidence of desaturation oxygen bradycardia and respiratory distress in the preterm newborn may have occurred due to the fact that they presented more respiratory problems, and heart; and the incoordination between the sucking, swallowing and breathing related to prematurity(4,7); or to the high incidence of GERD, despite the literature to be controversial about the relationship between GERD and clinical signs and symptoms(15-18). The difficulty of suction observed only in preterm newborns and may be related to immaturity in the neurological that this population presents, as described in the literature(8). It is believed that the nasal obstruction was observed in two of the NTS may be due both to the reflux to the nasopharynx observed in the evaluation, fluoroscopic and the presence of respiratory problems. Vomiting after feeding is one of the manifestations of GERD(30). In the present study, there was a higher incidence of vomiting in the RNT. To correlate the clinical signs and symptoms with change of the swallowing phases oral, pharyngeal and GERD, there was no difference. The literature reports that the RGE can stimulate receptors located mainly in the pharynx and larynx and trigger mechanisms reflexes that can generate symptoms cardiorrespiratórios acute bronchospasm, laringospasmo, apnea central and bradycardia, which can cause cyanosis(29). In addition, there was a difference in the relationship between the change of the deglutition and neurological problems. Children with neurological disorders, including trauma cranioencefálico, may show changes in swallowing(11,28). CONCLUSION The major findings of fluoroscópicos of deglutition found in preterm infants zero to six months of age were reflux to the nasopharynx and reflux gastresofágico. In addition, this population showed more heart problems than the RNT. In relation to the clinical signs and symptoms related to the change in swallowing, the preterm infants have a higher incidence of desaturation of oxygen. The audiologist should be aware of in the evaluation of swallowing in infants who have neurological problems, respiratory and/or cardiac and/or that are premature, because these are risk factors for change in swallowing, and, when possible and indicated, to complement the clinical assessment with the evaluation, fluoroscopic. New follow-up studies of this population should be performed to confirm the hypothesis that the changes in swallowing observed in this study occurred due to the immaturity in function of swallowing. In addition, new prospective studies with larger samples should be conducted for a better understanding of the physiology of normal swallowing in infants. 