ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE) still requires long periods of work and numerous tests. OBJECTIVE: Our objective is to evaluate the clinical outcomes after a negative research, using a combined protocol of angio, chest CT and CT venography (CTA/CTV), as the only diagnostic test in unselected patients with PE suspicion. METHODS: A retrospective cohort study that included consecutive patients with suspected PE were investigated with a combined protocol CTA / CTV. Patients who initially had a negative investigation and did not receive anticoagulants were followed for six months for the occurrence of recurrent venous thromboembolic events. RESULTS: Of 425 patients with suspected PE, 62 (14.6%) were diagnosed with venous thromboembolism in CTA / CTV home. The average age was 56 ± 19 years, and 61% of the population fell into the low clinical probability category. Deep venous thrombosis alone represented 21% of all venous thromboembolic events, and when considering the entire population, CTV was associated with an increase in diagnostic yield of 3.1%. Our group consisted of 320 patients with initially negative CTA/CTV and that did not received anticoagulants. After six months of follow-up, only three patients had recurrent thromboembolic events (0.9%, 95% CI -0.1% - 2.0%) and none were fatal. There were no deaths related to EP. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that a diagnostic strategy that uses CTA / CTV as the sole diagnostic test can rule out PE safely in people with low to moderate risk, and is associated with favorable results, with a negative predictive value of 99.1 %. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012; [Online].ahead print, PP.0-0) Keywords: Pulmonary embolism; computed tomography; chest; venography.     Introduction Most patients with suspected pulmonary embolism (PE) have an alternative diagnosis for their symptoms, and the prevalence of PE among those confirmed suspected cases ranges from 16% to 26% in contemporary series1-3. Thus, one of the biggest challenges in the work of the EP is the fast and secure deletion of the disease, avoiding unnecessary anticoagulation, and accelerate the diagnostic strategy. Computed tomography (CT) has quickly become the preferred method to exclude or confirm the diagnosis of EP4-6. However, the uncertainty remains on the sensitivity of CT angiography (CTA) as the only method of diagnosis and additional tests for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) have become an integral part of most diagnostic 7 algorithms. The CT venography (CTV) has an accuracy comparable with the compression ultrasonography (CUS) for the diagnosis of TVP8, with the additional advantage of being held in together with CTA (CTA / CTV). The combination of CTA and CTV is a very convenient strategy because it is capable, at the same time and without additional contrast material to detect emboli in the pulmonary circulation and residual thrombi in the deep veins of the legs 2,8, although patients must be exposed to additional radiation. The objectives of this study were of determining the diagnostic value of the addition of CTV to CTA and evaluate clinical outcomes after a CTA/CTV standard as the only diagnostic test in unselected patients with clinical suspicion of PE.   Patients and Methods Study population and data collection A CT-based algorithm that uses a combination of CTA and CTV has been the best diagnostic method of EP since 1999 in our institution, a non-academic hospital of high complexity. Using the database of the radiology department, we relate retrospectively all patients with clinical suspicion of PE, which were investigated CTA / CTV, between January 2004 and December 2007. This represents an unselected population, since the ventilation-perfusion scintigraphies (V/Q) were carried out only when there were no contraindications for the use of contrast material, and measurement of D-dimer had not been incorporated into our diagnostic algorithm at the time of the recruitment of patients for the study. Based on the radiologist's report, studies were classified as follows: positive for PE, PE and DVT or isolated DVT, negative and inconclusive. Patients with inconclusive studies were excluded due to technical limitations. Patients with negative studies were contacted by phone in order to verify the occurrence of recurrent venous thromboembolic events or death during the period of six months following the CTA / CTV. The patients using oral anticoagulants at any time and for any period within that period of six months, were also excluded. All clinical and demographic data were obtained from the medical chart, radiological records or directly from patients. The clinical probability of PE was estimated based on the following risk factors: malignancy (excluding skin cancer); prior venous thromboembolism; surgery within the month of CTA / CTV (intra-abdominal, thoracic and orthopedic surgery) and bedridden patients. The presence of at least one of the risk factors aforementioned identified the high risk group. The low-risk group consisted of patients with none of risk9 factors. During the telephone interview the researchers used a standardized questionnaire to determine the living conditions and circumstances of death, the occurrence of venous thromboembolic events and use of anticoagulants. The cause of death was determined on the basis of this information on the death certificate, medical records of patients, and information collected from family members. Death was attributed to the EP if it was preceded by suggestive symptoms of recurrent venous thromboembolism (VTE), it was sudden, with no other plausible cause or if it was confirmed at autopsy. A recurrent venous thromboembolic event was defined as PE or DVT confirmed by objective tests or death attributed to EP occurred within six months after the CT study. The study protocol conforms to the ethical guidelines of the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, was approved by the Research Ethics Committee and verbal consent was obtained from all patients (IRB: MCO / UFBA - n ° 70/2004). CTA / CTV protocol, all studies were performed on a GE CT scanner, high-speed helical and a single detector (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wisconsin). The lungs were scanned from the lower portion of the diaphragm to about 2 cm above the aortic arch-apnea 25-30 seconds and sequential images of 5 mm thickness of the lower extremities were acquired at 2 cm intervals, the from about 10 cm above the popliteal fossa until immediately above the iliac crest, 3 minutes after completion of the CTA. For all trials received 150 mL of contrast intravenously at a rate of 3 ml per second.   Results Baseline clinical characteristics A total of 425 patients with suspected PE was investigated with CTA / CTV. The general characteristics of this population are presented in Table 1. The average age was 56 ± 19 years, there was a predominance of females (63.1%) and the majority of the population was composed of patients who entered the emergency room (70.1%). More than half the population (57%) had at least one traditional risk factor for venous thrombosis. Symptoms and signs most frequent dyspnea and tachypnea were present in 55% and 67% of patients, respectively. The high-risk group consisted of 164 patients (38.6%) and the remaining 261 patients formed the low-risk group (61.4%).     CTA/CTV results and other imaging modalities Of the 425 studies of CTA / CTV, only 9 (2.1%) were considered inconclusive. Sixty-two patients (14.6%) tested positive, and of these, 14 (22.6%) had isolated EP, 35 (56.4%) had PE and DVT, and 13 (21%) had isolated DVT (figure 1). The venous thromboembolism rate according to clinical probability was 9.2% and 23.2% in the low and high risk groups, respectively. The isolated DVT was composed of 21% of diagnosed VTE events (13/62 patients). It was found in 13 of 425 patients, resulting in an incremental diagnostic value CTV for the entire population of 3.1% (95% CI 1.4% - 4.7%). The diagnostic contribution of CTV for the high-risk group (9/164 - 5.5%, 95% CI 2.0% - 8.9%) was much higher than for low-risk patients (4/261 - 1 5% 95% 0.04% - 3.0%) (table 2). The ventilation scintigraphy and perfusion were performed in only 3 of these patients (0.9%), one was interpreted as low probability and the other two as normal or nearly normal. The compression ultrasonography (CUS) was also performed on 25 additional patients (7.8%). In only one patient was found deep vein thrombosis, and was considered a recurring event. Clinical Results A total of 354 patients (83.3%) presented negative CTA/CTV studies. During follow-up, 20 patients received oral anticoagulants and were excluded: TEV provided (6); Atrial fibrillation (6), heart failure (3); valve prosthesis (2); Lupus + antiphospholipid antibodies (2); peripheral arterial thrombosis (1). In addition, 14 patients could not be contacted and were also excluded. The remaining 320 patients formed our retrospective cohort. During the six month follow-up, recurrent venous thromboembolic events were diagnosed in 3 out of 320 patients with an initially negative research (0.9%, 95% - 0.1% - 2.0%). Of these, two patients had PE (0.6%) and 1 patient, DVT (0.3%). The first patient had chest pain at seven days in a hospital for abdominal pain research. The CTA / CTV was negative for VTE, but a duplex scan performed on the same day showed a partial thrombosis involving the tibial veins and left popliteal. The second patient with long-standing congestive heart failure diagnostic presented with progressive dyspnoea. CTA/CTV only showed a significant right pleural effusion. She underwent therapeutic thoracentesis and three days later, as the symptoms did not diminish, a new CTA/CTV was ordered. This time it was viewed a plunger in the right pulmonary interlobar artery. The third patient entered the emergency room with dyspnea and CTA / CTV did not show VTE. She was discharged and returned ten days later with worsening symptoms. A new CTA / CTV revealed emboli bilateral subsegmental. The CTA / CTV negative predictive value calculated for recurrent VTE was 99.1%. The recurrence rate was 1.0% (95% - 0.4% - 2.5%) and 0.8% (95% - 0.8% - 2.3%) below the patient and high risk, respectively (table 2). None of the 3 patients with recurrent VTE died during the six-month follow-up. Of the 320 patients with negative CTA/CTV that did not receive anticoagulants and who completed the six month follow-up, 36 died (11.3%), but none of the deaths were attributed to EP. The only occurrence of sudden death was considered of cardiac origin, since the patient had a history of ischemic heart disease at an advanced stage. The causes of death in this population are detailed in table 3.     Discussion To develop a simple diagnostic strategy, practical and safe, which is widely available and applicable for most patients with suspected PE, is a highly desirable goal. Over the past 20 years, EP diagnostic strategies are characterized by the excessive number of sequential tests, long and frequent need diagnostic procedures invasivos10. The introduction of CTA pulmonary11, and subsequently CTV12 the lower limbs showed the ability to overcome most of limitations in older diagnostic strategies. This study confirms the significant incremental diagnostic value of CTV, which can be used in place of USC, and the clinical utility of CTA / CTV to rule out the diagnosis of PE, with safety as the only diagnostic test. Diagnostic contribution of CTV The accuracy of the CTV has been demonstrated in a recent meta-analysis of 13 comparative studies with USC (with the exception of one study that used venography), with pooled estimates of sensitivity and specificity of 96% and 95%, respectively 8. Although most experts recommend guidelines and imaging studies of the lower limbs before disposing safely EP, particularly in patients with moderate risk elevado7,13, some authors have claimed a debate about the absolute need for systematic search DVT in all patients with an initially negative14,15 CTA. Our data showed that 21% of TEV were isolated DVT events detected on CTV (13/61 patients), which means that patients with negative CTA would have been wrongly classified as having no TEV and left untreated. We found an incremental diagnostic value of CTV for the entire population of 3.1% (95% CI 1.4% - 4.7%). These data is consistent with the current literature, which shows incremental values ranging from 2.0% to 5.0%9.16 to 18, considering the entire study population, rather than just cases of VTE. More recently, the study PIOPED II reiterated the importance of the systematic testing of DVT, showing a sensitivity of 90% with the combined protocol CTA / CTV, as opposed to 83% with only CTA2. Also able to identify a subgroup of patients most likely to PE, in which the incremental value CTV was approximately four times higher compared with low-risk patients (5.5% vs. 1.5%). Therefore, our data show that CTV can replace the USC in those patients in need of DVT testing and also helps define a more select group of patients with higher risk of PE, which may result in a higher diagnostic value of a strategy It combines CTA and CTV, reducing costs and radiation exposure. Clinical results after CTA/CTV negative Another important contribution of this study is the demonstration that a CTA/CTV-only strategy is associated with favorable outcomes. Our data showed that in patients who initially had CTA / negative CTV, anticoagulation could have been avoided, regardless of clinical probability prior to testing. We found a recurrent VTE rate of 0.9% during the six months after the negative test, similar finding to the reported by other authors and other diagnostic strategies. A systematic review of all prospective studies using conventional pulmonary angiography showed that patients with negative results had an overall rate of recurrent VTE 1,719. Moores et al 20 reported similar results in a more recent meta-analysis of outcomes of patients studied with CTA, with a subsequent VTE rate, after three months of a negative test, 1.4% (95% CI 1.1 % - 1.8%). According to our best knowledge, the other study using the CTA / CTV result as the sole diagnostic test included only 181 patients from the intensive care unit, followed by a month, and found a negative predictive value of 97.121. The PIOPED II2, one of the most important research on the accuracy of the CTA / CTV for the diagnosis of PE, not formally reported results. The authors used a standard reference compound comprising a number of noninvasive tests in order to rule out or confirm the diagnosis of PE, and concluded that CTA / CTV was diagnostic only when the clinical evaluation and the test results were concordant. Additional tests were recommended in cases of inconsistencies between the assessment of clinical probability and image results. Our study, in turn, negative predictive values showed very similar regardless of pre-test clinical probability (Table 2). In the high clinical probability group, for example, a category in which the negative predictive value of CTA has been questioned, the negative predictive value was 99.2%. The discrepancy between the conclusions of PIOPED and our results stems from the fact that we used two different benchmarks to assess the accuracy of CTA / CTV. Researchers from PIOPED used a reference standard compound to diagnose and exclude the EP, which included scanning V / Q, USC lower limb, and in 225 patients (27%) Pulmonary Angiography Conventional (CPA). In our study, in turn, clinical outcomes were used after CTA/CTV as a safety measure of the diagnostic strategy. The accuracy of a diagnostic test is typically measured by comparing their performance with a gold standard reference, in the case of PE, the CPA has been considered as the reference test. However, besides its invasive nature, the CPA also has its own limitations regarding accuracy and coherence interobserver 22,23 Such limitations in the reference standard partially compromise the evaluation of the diagnostic characteristics of new tests. Study results, in turn, evaluate new diagnostic tests based on the occurrence of clinical events after the testing and diagnostic characteristics do not depend on a reference test, thus, overcome these limitations. CT with single versus multidetector detector Our study used only with single CT detector (SDCT), and our results would apply to newer technology is debatable. The multidetector CT (MDCT) is the latest technology for the diagnosis of PE, although a considerable number of medical centers in the world still use the SDCT. The sensitivity for diagnosis of PE improved from 66% -93% SDCT 24 with 83% -100% with TCMD2,25. Despite this improved sensitivity, in some studies, the use of MDCT has not been shown to reduce the importance of CTV when added to CTA2,17. Therefore, the use of both tests is recommended by most PIOPED II26 investigators. Additionally, in study results, although it can further diagnose pulmonary embolism, MDCT showed very similar recurrence rates compared with TCDU3,15,27. Since most of the daginosed with MDCT embolisms are subsegmental and the increasing of the accuracy of diagnosis has not obtained better results, some authors have had doubt on the clinical significance of small and peripheral EP, and increased concern sobrediagnóstico28. The isolated subsegmental embolism accounts for less than 10% of all EP29, and when untreated has been associated with good outcomings30,31. In a recent publication, the authors reported clinical results of three months of 93 patients who had been isolated subsegmental emboli found. At the end of the follow-up, none of the patients who did not receive anticoagulation presented a recurrent event30, a finding confirmed in another serie31. An interesting report showed that the location and size of subsegmental emboli detected in the CPA were inconsistent with clinical, radiologic and scintigraphic findings, suggesting that isolated microemboli are casual findings without clinical significance 32. In fact, EP incidentally found in CT contrast performed for different reasons, it is found in about 2% of patients hospitalizados33. Recent large prospective studies using multidetector CTA have, however, favored its use as independent test 34,35 . Perrier et al 34 assessed whether a measure strategy D-dimer and MDCT without using USC or CTV, can safely dispose of the EP. All patients with negative results on CTA were subjected to USC, but only a small proportion of them had DVT (0.9%, 95% CI 0.3% - 2.7%) 34. The same group of researchers tested the same hypothesis in a randomized study and showed that, regardless of whether the diagnostic strategy included the USC, the thromboembolic risk at three months was exactly the same35. Iy's important to stress that both studies enrolled only a small number of high-risk patients, and, as demonstrated by this study SDCT and others with MDCT17, the systematic use of CTV is associated with a significant incremental diagnostic value and should probably be recommended for such high risk patients, regardless of the technology used. Limitations First, as a retrospective cohort study, our study may suffer inherent biases in the collection of retrospective data process, review of records and memories of patients. Secondly, 14 patients with initially negative CTA/CTV could not be reached and were, therefore, excluded. The review of the clinical features of these patients showed a group of young and low risk. The average age was 52 ± 16 years, 50% were female and none of them presented a high risk as defined in this study. If we consider the recurrence rate found in our low risk patients (1.0%), one would expect at most only one additional VTE recurrences. In this case, the total number of recurrent VTE events was 4 of 320 (1.2%, 95% CI 0.0% - 2.5%) and thus would not compromise the overall results and conclusions.   Conclusion As far as we know, this is the first results study using a combination of CTA and CTV with a single detector, as a single diagnostic test in unselected patients with suspected PE. Unlike most of the previously published results of studies, it was entirely performed in a community hospital of high complexity, and thus, closer to the practical environment of most internal doctors. Our study suggests that the addition of the CTA CTV results in a significant increase in the number of patients with VTE, particularly high risk group. Furthermore, a strategy using CTA/CTV as the sole diagnostic test to rule out PE is associated with very favorable results, and appears to be safe in the majority of patients with suspected PE. This strategy should be tested in large prospective studies using the latest technology.   Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding This study had no external funding sources. Academic not associated to this study to graduate programs.   