 SUMMARY background: THE diagnosis of Pulmonary Embolism (PE) still requires long periods of work and countless tests. OBJECTIVE: Our objective is to evaluate the clinical outcomes after an investigation the negative using a combined protocol of angio CT of the thorax and venografia CT (CTA/CTV) as a sole diagnostic test in patients selected with suspected EP. METHODS: cohort Study, retrospective study that included consecutive patients with suspicion of pe who were investigated with a protocol of combined CTA/CTV. The patients who presented initially a research in the negative and had not received anticoagulant therapy were followed up for six months for the occurrence of venous thromboembolic events recurrent. RESULTS: Of 425 patients with suspected PE, 62 (14.6 percent) had a diagnosis of venous thromboembolism in the CTA/CTV to start. The mean age was 56 ± 19 years, and 61% of the population fell in the category of low probability clinical. Deep vein thrombosis isolated represented 21% of all venous thromboembolic events, and when we considered the entire population, the CTV was associated with an increment in diagnostic yield of 3.1%. Our group consisted of 320 patients with CTA/CTV is initially negative and that they had not received anticoagulants. After six months of follow-up, only three patients had recurrence of thromboembolic events (0,9%, CI 95% -0,1% - 2,0%) and none was fatal. There were no deaths related to the EP. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that a strategy of diagnosis that utilizes CTA/CTV as a sole diagnostic test can discard EP with safe, in population with low risk to moderate, and is associated with favorable results, with a negative predictive value of 99.1%. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0) key Words: pulmonary Embolism; computed tomography; chest; flebografia. Introduction The majority of patients with clinical suspicion of Pulmonary Embolism (PE) has an alternative diagnosis for his symptoms, and the prevalence of EP confirmed between these suspected cases varies from 16% to 26% in series contemporâneas1-3. Thus, one of the biggest challenges in the work of the EP is deleting fast and safe of the disease, avoiding anticoagulation, unnecessary, and accelerate the strategy of diagnosis. Computed Tomography (CT) has rapidly become the preferred method to exclude or confirm the diagnosis of EP4-6. However, uncertainty remains about the sensitivity of the Angio CT (CTA) as the sole method of diagnosis, and additional tests for the deep venous thrombosis (DVT) have become an integral part of most of the algorithms diagnósticos7. The venografia by CT (CTV) has a precision comparable with that of ultrasound-guided compression (USC) for the diagnosis of TVP8, with the additional advantage of being held in conjunction with the CTA (CTA/CTV). The combination of CTA and CTV is a strategy very convenient because it is able to, at the same time, and without contrast material further, to detect embolisms in pulmonary circulation, and thrombus residual in the deep veins of the pernas2,8, although patients should be exposed to radiation additional. The objectives of this study were to determine the diagnostic value of the addition of CTV to CTA and to evaluate the clinical results after a CTA/CTV is normal, as the sole diagnostic test in patients not selected, with a clinical suspicion of EP. Patients and Methods study Population and data collection An algorithm based on the TC that uses the combination of CTA and CTV has been the best diagnostic method of EP since 1999 in our institution, a hospital not academic high complexity. Using the database of the department of radiology, relate in retrospectively all patients with a clinical suspicion of EP, that were investigated with CTA/CTV, between January 2004 and December 2007. This represents a population that is not selected, once the scintigraphy ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) were made only when there were contraindications to the use of contrast material, and the measurement of D-Dimer had not been incorporated to our diagnostic algorithm at the time of recruitment of patients for the study. Based on the report of the radiologist, the studies were classified as follows: positive for EP, EP and DVT or DVT isolated, negative, and inconclusive. Patients with studies inconclusive were excluded because of technical limitations. Patients with studies negative were contacted by telephone in order to verify the occurrence of venous thromboembolic events, recurrent, or death during the period of six months following the CTA/CTV. Patients who were using oral anticoagulants at any time and for any period within that period of six months, were also excluded. All clinical and demographic data were obtained from the medical chart, records, radiological or directly from patients. The probability of clinical EP was estimated based on the following risk factors: malignant neoplasia (excluding skin cancer); venous thromboembolism prior to surgery within one month of the CTA/CTV (intra-abdominal, thoracic and orthopedic surgery), and bedridden patients. The presence of at least one of the risk factors above has identified the high-risk group. The low-risk group was composed of patients with any of the factors of risco9. During the phone interview the investigators used a standardized questionnaire to determine the living conditions and the circumstances of the death, the occurrence of venous thromboembolic events and use of anticoagulants. The cause of death was determined based on the information present in death certificates, medical records of the patients, and collected information from members of the family. The death was attributed to the EP if it was preceded by symptoms suggestive of venous thromboembolism recurrent VTE), if it was sudden, no other cause is plausible or if it was confirmed in the autopsy. A thromboembolic event venous recurrent was defined as pe, or DVT confirmed by objective tests or death attributed to the EP occurred within a period of six months after the study of TC. The study protocol conforms to the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975, was approved by the Research Ethics Committee and verbal consent was obtained from all patients (IRB: MCO/UFBA - no. 70/2004). Protocol CTA/CTV All studies were performed on a ct scanner GE, helical and high-speed detector (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wisconsin). The lungs were scanned from the lowest portion of the diaphragm up to about 2 cm above the aortic arch in apnea of 25-30-seconds, and sequential images of 5 mm thickness of the lower extremities were acquired at intervals of 2 cm, from approximately 10 cm above the fossa poplítea up to immediately above the iliac crest, 3 minutes after the end of the CTA. For all studies, were administered 150 mL of contrast intravenously at a rate of 3 mL per second. Results clinical Characteristics baseline A total of 425 patients with suspected EP was investigated with CTA/CTV. The general characteristics of this population are presented in table 1. The mean age was 56 ± 19 years, there was a predominance of females (63.1%) and the majority of the population was comprised of patients who entered the emergency room (at 70.1%). More than half the population (57%) had at least one risk factor traditional to venous thrombosis. The signs and symptoms the most frequent were dyspnea and tachypnea, present in 55% and 67% of patients, respectively. The high-risk group was comprised of 164 patients (38,6%) and the remaining 261 patients formed the low-risk group (61.4 per cent). The results of the CTA/CTV and other imaging modalities Of 425 studies of CTA/CTV, only 9 (2,1%) were considered inconclusive. Sixty two patients (14,6%) had scans positive, and of these, 14 (22,6%) had EP isolated, 35 (56.4 per cent) had EP and DVT, and 13 (21%) had DVT isolated (figure 1). The rate of venous thromboembolism according to the probability that the clinic was 9.2% and 23.2% in the groups of low and high risk, respectively. The DVT isolated was comprised of 21% of the events of VTE diagnosed (13/62 patients). She was found in 13 of the 425 patients, resulting in an incremental value for the diagnosis of CTV for the whole population 3.1% (IC 95% 1,4% - 4,7%). The contribution of the diagnostic use of the CTV for the high-risk group (9/164 – 5,5%, 95% CI from 2.0% to 8.9%) was much higher than for low-risk patients (4/261 - 1.5%, and 95% CI of 0.04% - 3,0%) (table 2). The scintigraphy ventilation and perfusion were made in only 3 of these patients (0,9%), one was interpreted as low probability and the other two as normal or nearly normal. The ultrasound-guided compression (USC) also was performed in 25 patients (7,8%). In just one was found deep venous thrombosis, and was considered a recurring event. Clinical results A total of 354 patients (83,3%) presented studies of CTA/CTV negative. During follow-up, 20 patients received oral anticoagulants were excluded: TEV expected (6); atrial fibrillation (6), heart failure (3); prosthesis (2); lupus + antibodies antiphospholipid (2); arterial thrombosis peripheral (1). Moreover, 14 patients could not be contacted and were also excluded. The remaining 320 patients formed our cohort, retrospective. During the six months of follow-up, venous thromboembolic events, recurrent infections were reported in 3 of the 320 patients with a research initially negative (0,9% CI 95% - 0,1% - 2,0%). Of these, 2 patients had EP (0,6%) and 1 patient, DVT (by 0.3%). The first patient presented chest pain to seven days in hospital for investigation of abdominal pain. The CTA/CTV was negative for VTE, but a duplex scan performed on the same day revealed a thrombosis partial involving the veins tibial and poplítea left. The second patient with a diagnosis of longstanding congestive heart failure presented with dyspnea, progressive. The CTA/CTV showed only a significant pleural effusion right. She was subjected to thoracentesis therapeutic and three days later, as the symptoms not diminished, a new CTA/CTV was ordered. This time, it was viewed an embolus in the pulmonary artery interlobar right. The third patient entered in the er with dyspnea and CTA/CTV showed TEV. She was discharged and returned ten days later, with worsening of symptoms. A new CTA/CTV revealed plungers subsegmentares bilateral. The negative predictive value calculated from the CTA/CTV for TEV applicant was 99.1%. The rate of recurrence was 1.0% (CI 95% - 0,4% - 2,5%) and 0.8% (IC 95% - 0,8% - 2,3%) in patients of low and high risk, respectively (table 2). None of the 3 patients with VTE appellant died during the six-month follow-up. Of the 320 patients with CTA/CTV negative who did not receive anticoagulants and who had completed the six month follow-up period, 36 died (11,3%), but none of the deaths was attributed to the EP. The only occurrence of sudden death was considered cardiac in origin, since the patient had a history of ischemic cardiomyopathy in an advanced stage. The causes of death in this population are detailed in table 3. Discussion to Develop a strategy of diagnosis is simple, practical and secure, which is widely available and applicable to the majority of patients with suspected EP, is an objective highly desirable. In the last 20 years, the strategies for the diagnosis of EP have been characterized by an excessive number of tests sequential, long periods of diagnosis and frequent necessity of procedures invasivos10. The introduction of CTA pulmonar11, and subsequently CTV12 of the lower limbs, presented the possibility of overcoming most of the limitations in the strategies of diagnosis older. The present study confirms the significant incremental value for the diagnosis of CTV, which can be used in place of USC, and the clinical utility of CTA/CTV to rule out the diagnosis of pe, with safe, as a single diagnostic test. Contribution to diagnosis of CTV THE accuracy of CTV was demonstrated in a recent meta-analysis of 13 comparative studies with USC (with the exception of one study that used venografia), with estimates of the combined sensitivity and specificity of 96% and 95%, respectivamente8. Although most guidelines and experts recommend imaging studies of the lower limbs before you dispose, with safety, the EP, particularly in patients with moderate risk, the elevado7,13, some authors have claimed it is a debate as to the absolute necessity for the systematic search for DVT in all patients with a CTA initially negativa14,15. Our data showed that 21% of the events of VTE was DVT isolated detected in the CTV (13/61 patients), which means that these patients with CTA negative would have been wrongly classified as not having a VTE, and left without treatment. We found a diagnostic value incremental CTV for the whole population 3.1% (IC 95% 1,4% - 4,7%). These data are in agreement with the current literature, which shows the incremental values that range from 2.0% to 5.0%9,16-18, considering the whole study population, rather than only the cases of VTE. More recently, the II study PIOPED reiterated the importance of systematic testing of DVT, showing a sensitivity of 90% with the protocol combined CTA/CTV, as opposed to 83% with only the CTA2. Also we were able to identify a subgroup of patients with a greater probability of EP, in which the incremental value of CTV was approximately four times higher when compared with low-risk patients (5,5% versus 1.5 percent). Therefore, our data show that the CTV can replace the USC in those patients who require tests of TVP, and also helps to define a more select group of patients with increased risk of EP, which can result in a higher diagnostic value of a strategy of combining CTA and CTV, reducing costs and exposure to radiation. Clinical outcomes after CTA/CTV negative Another important contribution of the present study is the demonstration that a strategy based only on the CTA/CTV is associated with outcomes favourable. Our data showed that in patients who had initially CTA/CTV negative, anticoagulation could have been avoided, regardless of the likelihood clinics before testing. We found a rate of VTE recurrent of 0.9% during the six months after the negative test, a finding similar to that reported by other authors, and other strategies of diagnosis. A systematic review of all prospective studies using pulmonary angiography conventional showed that patients with negative results had an overall rate of VTE-recurrent 1,719. Moores and colleagues.20 reported similar results in a meta-analysis of the most recent results of the patients studied with CTA, with a rate of VTE subsequent, after three months of a negative test, of 1.4% (95% CI 1,1% - 1,8%). According to the best of our knowledge, the other study that used the result of CTA/CTV as a sole diagnostic test had only 181 patients of the intensive care unit, accompanied by one month, and found a negative predictive value of 97,121. The PIOPED II2, one of the investigations most important about the accuracy of CTA/CTV for the diagnosis of EP, not reported formally to the results. The authors used a reference standard compound comprising a number of non-invasive tests in order to exclude or confirm the diagnosis of pe, and concluded that the CTA/CTV was diagnosis only when the clinical evaluation and the results of the tests were consistent. Additional tests have been recommended in cases of inconsistencies between the assessment of the probability of clinical and imaging results. Our study, in turn, showed predictive values negative very similar, regardless of the likelihood of clinical pre-test (table 2). In the group of high-probability clinical, for example, a category in which the negative predictive value of CTA has been questioned, the negative predictive value was 99.2%. The discrepancy between the conclusions of the PIOPED and our results stems from the fact that you used two different benchmarks to evaluate the accuracy of CTA/CTV. Investigators PIOPED studies used a reference standard compound for diagnosing and delete the EP, which included scanning V/Q, the USC of the lower limbs, and in 225 patients (27%) Pulmonary Angiography Conventional (CPA). In our study, in turn, were used the clinical results after the CTA/CTV as a security measure, the strategy of diagnosis. The accuracy of a diagnostic test is usually measured by comparing its performance with a reference standard gold, and in the case of EP, the CPA has been considered the reference test. However, in addition to its nature invasive, the CPA also has its own limitations with regard to accuracy and concordance interobservador22,23. Such limitations in the reference standard shall undertake partially to the evaluation of the characteristics of diagnostic tests. Studies results, in turn, evaluate new diagnostic tests based on the occurrence of clinical events after the application of the tests, and does not depend on the diagnostic features of a reference test, thus, overcome these limitations. CT with detector single versus multidetectores Our study used only CT with detector single (TCDU), and if our results would apply to newer technology is debatable. The TC Multidetectores (MDCT) is the latest technology for the diagnosis of EP, although a considerable number of medical centres in the world still use the TCDU. The sensitivity for the diagnosis of EP has improved to 66%-93%24 TCDU 83%-100% with TCMD2,25. Despite this improvement of the sensitivity, in some studies, the use of MDCT has been shown to reduce the importance of the CTV when it is added to CTA2,17. Therefore, the use of both tests has been recommended by most of the researchers of the PIOPED II26. In addition, in studies of the results, although able to diagnose more pulmonary embolisms, MDCT showed recurrence rates are very similar, when compared with the TCDU3,15,27. As the majority of the embolisms diagnosed with MDCT are subsegmentares and the increase in the accuracy of the diagnosis has not translated into better results, some authors cast doubt on the clinical significance of EP-small and peripheral, and has increased the concern of the sobrediagnóstico28. Embolism subsegmental isolated accounts for less than 10% of all EP29, and when untreated has been associated with good desfechos30,31. In a recent publication, the authors reported the clinical results of three months of 93 patients who had been found embolisms subsegmentares isolated. At the end of the monitoring period, none of the patients who did not receive anticoagulation had displayed event recorrente30, a finding confirmed in another serie31. A report interesting showed that the location and size of embolisms subsegmentares detected in the CPA was inconsistent with the clinical findings, radiological and scintigraphic, suggesting that the microembolias isolated finds casual, non-significant clínica32. In fact, the PE found incidentally on ct scan with contrast, performed for different reasons, is observed in about 2% of the patients hospitalizados33. Large prospective studies recent using CTA, multidetector do, however, have favored its use as a test independente34,35. Perrier and colleagues.34 assessed whether a strategy of measured D-dimer and MDCT, without the use of USC or the CTV can safely discard the EP. All patients with negative results on CTA were subjected to USC, but only a small proportion of them presented DVT (0,9% CI 95% 0,3% - 2,7%)34. The same group of researchers tested the same hypothesis in a randomized trial and demonstrated that, regardless of whether the strategy of diagnosis included the USC, the risk of thromboembolic to the three months was exactly the mesmo35. It is important to note that both studies recruited only a small number of high-risk patients, and, as demonstrated by the present study with TCDU and by others with MDCT17, the systematic use of CTV is associated with a diagnostic value the incremental significant and should probably be recommended for these high-risk patients, regardless of the technology used. Limitations First, as a cohort, retrospective, our study may suffer from biases inherent in the process of data collection a retrospective review of the records and memories of the patients. In the second place, 14 patients with CTA/CTV initially negative could not be contacted and were therefore excluded. The review of the clinical features of these patients revealed a group of young individuals and low-risk. The mean age was 52 ± 16 years, 50% were female, and none of them presented a high risk, as defined in the present study. If we consider the rate of recurrence found in our low-risk patients (1,0%), one would expect, at most, only a single recurrence of VTE additional. In this case, the total number of events of VTE-recurrent, which would be 4 320 (1.2%, the 95% CI of 0.0% - 2.5%) and, therefore, would not compromise the overall results and conclusions. Conclusion Until where our knowledge reaches, this is the first outcome study that uses a combination of CTA and CTV with a single detector, such as diagnostic testing only in patients selected with suspected EP. Unlike most studies of results published previously, this was carried out entirely in a community hospital of high complexity, and thus, closer to the environment where you practice the majority of medical doctors internal. Our study suggests that the addition of CTV to CTA results in a significant increase in the number of patients with a diagnosis of VTE, particularly in the high-risk group. In addition, a strategy that uses the CTA/CTV as a sole diagnostic test to rule out the EP is associated with very favorable results, and it seems to be safe in the majority of patients with suspected EP. This strategy should be tested in large prospective studies, and using cutting edge technology. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interest relevant. Sources of Funding this study had no external funding sources. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 