ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Reduction of heart rate (HR) in angiography tomography of the coronary arteries (ATCCor) is critical to image quality. The efficacy of the calcium blockers as alternatives for patients with contraindications to beta-blockers is not defined. OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy in reducing the HR and RR variability of metoprolol and diltiazem in ATCCor. METHODS: A prospective, randomized, open, included patients with clinical indication ATCCor in sinus rhythm with HR > 70 bpm and without the use of agents that interfere with the FC. Fifty patients were randomly assigned to groups: IV 5-15 mg metoprolol or even FC≤60 bpm (M), and diltiazem IV 0,25-0,60mg / kg or even FC≤60 bpm (D). Blood pressure (BP) and HR were measured at baseline, 1min, 3min and 5min after agents, acquisition and after ATCCor. RESULTS: HR reduction in absolute terms was higher in group M than in group D (1, 3, 5 minutes, acquisition and post-test). The percentage reduction in HR was significantly higher in group M, only 1 min and 3 min after start of the agents. There was no difference in 5 min for the acquisition and after examination. The RR variability percentage of group D was smaller than that of group M during acquisition (RR variability / FC middle of acquisition). A single case of BAV, 2: 1 Mobitz I, reverted spontaneously occurred (group D). We conclude that diltiazem is an effective and safe alternative to beta-blockers in reducing FC in performing computed tomography angiography of the coronary arteries. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012; [Online] .ahead print, PP.0-0) Keywords: Diltiazem; calcium channel blockers; coronary angiography; tomography; coronary vessels.     Introduction Images of the coronary arteries are key elements for management decisions in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) have known or suspected. The classical method for obtaining images of the coronary arteries is the invasive catheterization or coronary angiography, which as invasive procedure, has added the risk of complications not negligible and thus are indicated in specific cases of high suspicion of CAD or situations of acute presentation of this disease1 . Recently, a new method of noninvasive assessment of coronary arteries using computed tomography equipment, is able to visualize the lumen and the wall of the arteries coronarianas2-5. This method was developed with the advent of CT scan of multiple columns of detectors (MDCT) that allowed much faster acquisition of images; so the visualization of the coronary arteries as static images without significant motion artifacts. While publications multicenter international studies have validated this tecnologia6-8, demonstrating high accuracy in relation to catheterization, various guidelines and consensus documents nacionais9 and internacionais10 reinforce that computed tomography angiography of coronary arteries (ATCCor) has important current clinical indications, among including: patients with CAD pretest probability intermediate unable to work; patients with examination of doubtful or discordant previous image with the clínico11 framework; evaluation of chest pain in the emergency department in patients with low pretest probability or intermediate and normal ECG or doubtful and markers of myocardial necrosis ( "enzymes") normal or doubtful; evaluation of suspected coronary anomalies; among others of great clinical relevance. Despite, however, the best temporal resolution of current tomography equipment, heart rate (HR) of the patient during the acquisition of ATCCor pictures still needs to be around 60 beats per minute ( < 65 bpm) for the quality image is great and / or the radiation dose is the smallest possível12,13.Adicionalmente, the RR interval should also be regular for optimal image quality, and the irregularity of the heartbeat, and premature beats or atrial fibrillation, extremely damaging to the image acquisition in ATCCor14,15.Na current routine use of this test is obtained by reducing the FC ATCCor the preferential use of beta-blockers, either oral administration, either intravenously. Intravenous use has been preferred by most services in Brazil for its ease of use, security and speed of action, allowing a rapid flow of patients by MDCT equipment. The reduction in HR to take ATCCor, blockers, calcium channel blockers are alternatives to for patients with contraindications to esses16. Beta-blockers, even the selective effect B1, are contraindicated in patients with severe asthma or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, especially with episodes of bronchoconstriction or using broncodilatadores17,18. Acute use of beta blockers is also contraindicated in cases of decompensated CHF, hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 100 mmHg, atrioventricular block advanced, severe aortic stenosis, diabetes at risk of hypoglycemia and severe peripheral arterial disease (eg.: Intermittent claudication or Raynaud's disease) .In all of the above contraindications, lung diseases are the most commonly encountered in clinical practice and the complication of severe bronchoconstriction crisis associated with the acute use of beta-blockers one of the most feared. An alternative to beta blockers to reduce FC ATCCor and presents no contraindication in patients with pulmonary disease broncoconstrictiva are blockers of calcium channels nãodiidropiridinas as verapamil (fenilaquilaminas) and diltiazem (benzothiazepines) 19. However, while in numerous texts cited as an alternative to betablockers, the efficacy of calcium channel blockers used in CF reduction prior to examination ATCCor has not been clearly defined and comparative data are still missing. Another potential drug for the reduction of HR in this clinical situation is ivabradine, which is only available in oral form in Brazil, its intravenous formulation not yet available for clinical use. We participate in international study with ivabradine for intravenous administration, and this demonstrated good results in the reduction of HR at the day of ATCCor20. In the present study, therefore, our objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of diltiazemna reduction FCe variability of the RR interval compared to metoprololem patients referred to perform ATCCor.   Methods We outlined a prospective, randomized (1: 1) and open. Patients with clinical indication ATCCor in sinus rhythm and with FC > 70 bpm were included and randomized to recebermetoprolol or intravenous diltiazem. Metoprolol (metoprolol tartrate, Seloken®) was used at a dose of 5mg slow intravenous injection repeated until FC ≤ 60 bpm or the maximum dose of 15mg. Diltiazem (diltiazem hydrochloride, Balcor®) was used at a dose of 0.25 mg / kg in 2 minutes and FC > 60 bpm, additional dose of 0.35 mg / kg in 2 minutes. Patients were excluded in use of agents that interfere with the FC. Thus, we excluded those who were in previous use of beta-blockers, calcium blockers or any other agent to interfere in the conduct of the AV node or alter the FC. All patients signed a free and informed consent, and the study was approved by the institutional ethics committee. The baseline HR as well as the systolic blood pressure, diastolic and mean (BP) were measured before and after 1min, 3 min infusion and 5minda agents. All measurements were repeated after the completion of ATCCor. The RR variability was measured for the acquisition of the examination, using the electrocardiographic tracing the recorded rate during acquisition of the images provided by the CT equipment in general, an ECG trace for 8 to 12 seconds of acquisition (8 to 12 beats ). The absolute RR variability was defined as the difference between the highest and lowest CF, or the largest and the smallest RR interval, and expressed as beats per minute (bpm). Thus, a lower variability indicates less difference between the minimum and maximum heart rate during acquisition. The RR variability was calculated as the percentage of absolute RR variability divided by the average rate during the acquisition of ATCCor. Patients were followed up to 30 minutes after the examination to follow up the effects of security officers and evaluation in case of possible side effects caused by examination or its preparation. As mentioned earlier, the HR and BP were measured at baseline, before administration of any medication. The evaluation of HR and BP were repeated in 1min, 3min and 5min after start of infusion of the agents. In addition, the HR was measured during the acquisition of ATCCor (at that time was not possible to measure BP) and, finally, both the HR and BP were measured again 10 minutes after the ATCCor. The HR was measured by the electrocardiographic tracing monitor and PA, measured with sphygmomanometer using the traditional auscultation. The measurements were performed with the patient supine on the table MDCT equipment. It was also calculated the percent reduction in HR in relation to basal HR of each patient, thus normalizing the effects of drugs for initial HR of each patient, which showed significant variation. The ATCCor used standard protocol for image acquisition in MDCT equipment with 64-Section (Aquilion 64, Toshiba Medical Systems, Otawara, Japan) and injection of iodinated contrast nonionic at the time of acquisition. This protocol is described in prévio21 work. The statistical analysis used the Shapiro-Wilk test to determine whether the distribution was normal. For variables with normal distribution, the Student t test for two means with similar variance was used to compare HR in both groups of agents at each moment in time. For variables with non-parametric distribution we used the Kruskal-Wallis test.   Results We selected 126 consecutive patients referred to the Department of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance and Computed Tomography our institution with clinical indication of ATCCor. Seventy-six patients were excluded due to some exclusion criteria: Current use of any agent that causes bradycardia or interfere with the conduct of the AV node, cardiac rhythm other than sinus, HR < 70 bpm. 50 consecutive patients were thus included, 38 men (76%) and 12 women (38%) and mean age of 57.8 ± 6.7 years. Patients were randomized to Metoprolol group (M) or diltiazem (D), with 25 patients in each group. Only six patients (24%) in group D received 0.25 mg / kg of diltiazem and demais19 patients (76%) received a total dose of 0.6mg / kg. The average dose of diltiazem was 0.516 ± 0.15 mg / kg. In M group, eight patients received 5mg, eight patients received 10mg and nine patients received 15 mg of metoprolol. The mean dose of metoprolol was 10.2 ± 4.2mg. No patient developed symptoms during or after administration of the agents. Two patients had frequent ventricular premature beats at baseline, both the group D. After infusion of the agents and during or after the acquisition of ATCCor; four patients had ventricular premature beats (the same two patients presenting at baseline and two patients without arrhythmia, also those of group D). One patient in the M group showed significant accentuation of sinus arrhythmia during acquisition, with significant variability RR 10 beats, thus damaging the image acquisition. One patient had Group D AV block 2nd grade 2: 1Mobitz I, no symptom or hemodynamic effect and reverted spontaneously during the observation of the patient (after 10 minutes). Baseline HR was similar between groups. The FC times in 1 minute, 3 minutes, 5 minutes, and post-acquisition ATCCor were significantly lower in the F group compared to the group D, particularly 1min, and 3min 5min (Table 1). The minimum and maximum FC are shown in Table 1. Figure 1 shows all the points of all patients with the evolution of HR in both groups. Figure 2 shows the FC predicted curve using polynomial fractional adjustment for each point and its confidence interval, for both groups. If we consider the percentage reduction from baseline FC will be normalizing the data for initial HR of each patient, which showed significant variation. Thus, the percentage reduction in HR was higher in M ​​group than in D, only the first and third minutes, being more significant in the fifth minute, acquisition and post-ATCCor (tab. 2). The absolute RR variability showed a trend to less variability in Group D, while the percentage variability (RR variability / HR average acquisition) was statistically lower in group D than in M ​​for the acquisition (tab. 3). The behavior of blood pressure are shown in Tables 4, 5 and 6. After early intravenous injection of drugs BP reduced and returned to recover in the post-acquisition period. The PA declines were mild and did not result in any symptoms of hypotension in any patient. In general, group D showed lower BP even at baseline and remained more hypotensive throughout the monitoring period with respect to the group M.   Discussion In tests ATCCor by intravenous injection of nonionic iodinated contrast, allows the detailed anatomical visualization of the coronary arteries, vascular grafts (breast and bypass) and intra and extracardiac structures such as valves, thrombi and pericardium. As mentioned above, the acquisition and reconstruction of ATCCor pictures are carried out synchronized with electrocardiographic signal. Therefore, the optimized image acquisition through the HR management of patients, to improve diagnostic quality and the use of lower radiation dose possível14,15. In the apparatus 64 switches, patients must have regular FC, since data are obtained at different rate (usually six to eight), and then combined into a single volume. Thus, if there is unevenness among the RR intervals, the combined data that have been acquired at different phases of the cardiac cycle will result in "steps" and / or motion artifacts. Furthermore, low and regular FC allows the use of dose modulation algorithms connected to the ECG where the highest dose of X-ray is released only during diastole or even the use of prospective acquisition (less shots of unit), which can reduce the radiation dose by 60%. Already in the last generation of devices, which are still not available nationwide, the image acquisition is made for only one or two beats. Still, the use of negative chronotropic agents is important. Although less critical, the control of HR is still used almost universally in order to make the most of your dose reduction capability, which can get to be less than 1mSv (about 10 simple chest X-rays) 22. Protocols vary according to the services, but have as FC target at the time of acquisition, values ​​below 65 bpm. If the patient get to the exam site with your HR above that invariably receive medication for HR control. The first group of agents used to control the HR of betablockers is, by pre-medication orally about one hour before the examination, or intravenously immediately before the examination. However, some studies that analyzed the performance of this strategy found surprisingly high rates (27% to 34%) of patients who did not reach the target HR, even after oral premedication and use the maximum dose (20 mg) of intravenous beta-blocker more commonly used, metoprolol tartrate. Furthermore, there was a high number (16%) of patients with any degree of contraindication for use of this class of agents. All this contributes to a worse quality of diagnostic images and explains the need to have strategies and drugs alternativos23,24. Are on contraindications for the use of beta-blockers, selective or not, the presence of advanced atrioventricular block, hypotension, asthma, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and instability clínica16. While there are studies confirming the safety of chronic use of selective beta-blockers in low doses and orally in patients with DPOC25, acute intravenous for ATCCor, especially in patients using beta-adrenergic such as bronchodilators, is still considered the clinical point of view, and pharmacological as a contraindication, and studies in the literature testing this particular situation are not available. The calcium channel blocker, particularly diltiazem, may be used in cases of patients with lung disease, constituting a simple alternative, effective and widely available to control FC16. Calcium channel blockers decrease conduction through the atrioventricular node and to a lesser extent in nósinoatrial26. By this mechanism, they are the group of choice for pre-examination control patients atrial27 fibrillation. Do not induce bronchospasm, but have less intense negative chronotropic effect. Among them, diltiazem should preferably be chosen to present a minor negative inotropic effect. The recommended dose of diltiazem is 0.25 mg / kg, IV, for 2 minutes, and may be made a second dose of 0.35 mg / kg, the FC target is not reached. Our results suggest that the second dose is generally needed to reach the target FC. So we can make the first dose in the preparation room and the second, as in the examination room. In some cases, in clinical practice, when the patient arrives at the service with higher HR ( > 90 bpm) to facilitate dosing strategy, since the calculated maximum dose of 0.6 mg / kg to infuse medication in 15 to 20 minutes, diluted in 100 ml saline. This present study was one of the first to investigate in a controlled manner the use of diltiazem in this application for ATCCor and compare with the beta-blocker. A direct comparison between the main drug, metoprolol and diltiazem is scarce in the literature. In the present study we observed a significant decrease in HR after 1, 3 and 5 minutes of infusion of drugs, both in the group of patients who received beta-blockers in the group that received diltiazem, with a greater reduction in the first, but only with statistical significance in the third minute and not the end of the infusion. We also note the safety in the use of diltiazem in this context of ATCCor. Blood pressure after the exam was equal in both groups (despite the theoretical greater vasodilation with the calcium channel blocker) and there was no record of major disturbances in heart rhythm. One thing very important and unique data investigated in this study was that patients receiving diltiazem had a significantly lower variability of the RR interval during the acquisition of ATCCor, which potentially adds an advantage in the quality of images acquired in CT angiography of coronary arteries, particularly in equipment 64-Section. The combined use of beta-blockers and diltiazem is not recommended in the routine, the potential to cause bradyarrhythmias. However, in some specialized centers and in selected patients when it reaches the maximum dose of beta-blocker and FC remains well above the target, has been associated with a dose of 0.25 mg / kg of diltiazem, managing to carry out the acquisition below 70 bpm, uneventful record. In this case, the patient is under observation after the test, the half-life of elimination of diltiazem time which is 3.5 to 4.5 hours (personal experience of the authors). Every center that performs the examination should be prepared with equipment and personnel trained in advanced life support in cardiology to treat potential complications, such as hypotension and bradycardia. The basic treatment includes volume management and elevation of the lower limbs. Glucagon antidotes (for beta-blockers) and gluconate or calcium chloride should also be available, as well as atropine and vasoactive amines, for cases of extreme gravity, which fortunately are very rare. In short, there was efficient decrease in HR in both groups, with a greater reduction in the metoprolol group. In turn, the lower RR variability during acquisition of the examination demonstrated with diltiazem, together with its coronary vasodilatory effect is characteristic inherent to the drug which may offer advantages over the classical use of beta-blockers. It is important to note, however, that in this study we did not perform a direct evaluation of the quality of the images obtained in both groups. As there are several studies showing a direct relationship between the degree of reduction of HR and the final quality of imagens13-15, in this study we chose to limit our investigation to an indirect assessment of the effect of HR control agents on the final quality of images. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that this issue is an important limitation, and it would be very desirable that further studies were performed to clarify specifically the relationship between the type of drug used to control the FC and the final quality of the images. Thus, we would have definitive proof that the diltiazem is an effective alternative to beta-blockers in this clinical context. Finally, the present randomized controlled trial concluded that, in the clinical situation of realization of ATCCor tests, HR reduction was greater with metoprololdo who diltiazem. Diltiazem showed lower RR variability during image acquisition compared to metoprolol, which also is associated with better picture quality. Above all, diltiazem proved as an effective and safe alternative to beta-blockers in reducing FC prior to performing computed tomography angiography of the coronary arteries Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant, except for authors Drs. Carlos Santana Rochitte and Guilherme Nunes Azevedo, as they receive fees for development of Computed Tomography Coronary text of the Laboratory Baldacci, producer of Balcor (Diltiazem). Sources of Funding This study was partially funded by the Zerbini Foundation. Academic not associated in this study to graduate programs.   