ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Reducing the heart rate (HR) in CT angiography of the coronary arteries (CTACor) is critical to image quality.
 The effectiveness of calcium blockers as an alternative for patients with contraindications to beta-blockers has not been established yet.
 OBJECTIVES: To compare HR reduction efficiency and the RR variability of metoprolol and diltiazem in CTACor.
 METHODS: A prospective, randomized, open study included patients with clinical indication of CTACor, in sinus rhythm, with HR>70 bpm and without any agents that could interfere with the HR.
 Fifty patients were randomly assigned to the following groups: metoprolol IV 5-15 mg or up to HR≤60 bpm (M), and diltiazem IV 0.25-0.60mg/kg or up to HR≤60 bpm (D).
 Blood pressure (BP) and HR were measured at the baseline, 1min, 3min and 5min after the agents, during the scans and after CTACor. RESULTS: HR reduction in absolute values was higher in group M than in group D (1, 3, 5 minutes, scans and post-test).
 HR percentage reduction was significantly higher in group M only 1 min and 3 min after the agents started. There was no difference in min 5, during the scans and after the test. RR variability percentage in group D was statistically lower than in group M during the scans (RR variability/mean HR during scans).
 There was a single case of AVB, Mobitz I 2:1, which reverted spontaneously (group D). CONCLUSION: We conclude that diltiazem is an effective and safe HR reduction alternative to beta-blockers when conducting CT angiography of the coronary arteries. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012; [Online].ahead print, PP.0-0) Keywords: Diltiazem; calcium channel blockers; coronary angiography; tomography; coronary vessels.     Introduction Coronary artery imaging is a crucial element for managing decisions in patients with known or suspected Coronary Artery Disease (CAD).
 The classical method for obtaining coronary artery images is invasive catheterization or coronary angiography, which, as an invasive procedure, has a non-negligible risk of complications and is therefore recommended in specific cases of highly suspected or clearly diagnosed CAD (1).
 A recent, noninvasive method for the assessment of coronary arteries using CT equipment is able to visualize the lumen and the coronary artery wall (2-5).
 This method was developed with the creation of multiple-detector computed tomography (MDCT), which enabled a much faster image acquisition and, therefore, the visualization of coronary arteries as static images with no significant motion artifacts.
 While international and multicenter studies have validated this technology (6-8), showing its high accuracy when compared to catheterization, several domestic (9) and international (10) guidelines and consensus documents confirm that CT angiography of the coronary arteries (CTACor) has important current clinical indications, including: patients with intermediate pretest probability of CAD who are unable to exercise; patients whose previous imaging tests raise doubts or contradict the clinical status (11); the assessment of chest pain in ER patients with low or intermediate pretest probability and normal or doubtful ECG and normal or doubtful myocardial necrosis markers ("enzymes"); the assessment of suspected coronary anomalies; among others of great clinical relevance.

 However, despite the best temporal resolution of current CT equipment, the patient's heart rate (HR) during the acquisition of CTACor images must be around 60 beats per minute (<65 bpm) for optimal image quality and/or for the radiation dose to be as low as possible (12, 13). Additionally, optimal image quality requires a regular RR interval, since irregular heartbeats, such as in extrasystoles and atrial fibrillation, are extremely damaging to CTACor scans (14, 15). In this examination's current routine, HR reduction is achieved through the preferential use of beta-blockers, either by oral or intravenously administration
 Intravenous administration has been preferred by most services in Brazil due to its simplicity, safety and fast-acting properties, allowing a rapid flow of patients through the MDCT equipment.
 Calcium channel blockers are an effective alternative for reducing the HR in CTACor tests when patients have contraindications to beta-blockers.
 Beta-blockers, even those with selective B1 effect, are contraindicated in patients with severe asthma or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, especially with bronchoconstriction episodes or when using bronchodilators (17, 18).
 The acute use of beta-blockers is also contraindicated in cases of decompensated CHF, hypotension (systolic pressure < 100mmHg, advanced atrioventricular block, severe aortic stenosis, hypoglycemia risk diabetes, and severe peripheral arterial disease


(e.g.: intermittent claudication or Raynaud's disease). Of all the aforementioned contraindications, lung diseases are the most commonly found in clinical practice, whereas severe bronchoconstriction crisis associated with the acute use of beta-blockers is one of the most feared.
 One alternative to beta-blockers for reducing HR in CTACor tests, and which presents no contraindications in patients with bronchoconstriction pulmonary disease, is non-dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers such as verapamil (phenylakylamines) and diltiazem (benzothiazepines). (19)
 However, although mentioned in numerous texts as an alternative to beta-blockers, the effectiveness of calcium-channel blockers in reducing the patient's HR before CTACor tests has not been clearly established and comparative data are still unavailable.
 Another potential drug for HR reduction in this clinical context is ivabradine, which in Brazil is only available for oral administration, since its intravenous form is not yet available for clinical use.
 We took part in an international study with ivabradine intravenous administration, and it showed good HR reduction results when conducting CTACor tests. (20)
 In this study, therefore, our objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of diltiazem in decreasing HR and RR interval variability compared to metoprolol in patients referred to undergo CTACor.
   Methods We conducted a prospective, randomized (1:1) and open study. Patients with a clinical indication of CTACor, in sinus rhythm, and with HR > 70 bpm were included and randomized to receive intravenous metoprolol or diltiazem.
 Metoprolol (metoprolol tartrate, Seloken®) was used at a dose of 5mg, in slow intravenous injection, repeated until HR ≤ 60 bpm or up to a maximum dose of 15mg. Diltiazem (diltiazem hydrochloride, Balcor®) was used at a dose of 0.25 mg/kg in 2 minutes and if HR > 60 bpm, at an additional dose of 0.35 mg/kg in 2 minutes.
 Patients using agents that might interfere with the HR were excluded. The study therefore excluded all patients who had prior use of beta-blockers, calcium blockers or any other agent that might interfere in the conduction of the AV node or change the HR.
 All patients signed a free and informed consent form, and the study was approved by the institution's Ethics committee.
 Basal HR, as well as systolic, diastolic and mean blood pressure (BP), were measured 1 minute, 3 minutes and 5 minutes before and after the administration of the agents. 
 All measurements were repeated after the completion of the CTACor. RR variability was measured during the examination by using the electrocardiographic tracing of the recorded heartbeats during the image acquisition process, provided by the CT equipment; in general, an ECG tracing during the 8 to 12 seconds of the acquisition process (8-12 beats).
 Absolute RR variability was defined as the difference between the highest and lowest HR, or the largest and smallest RR interval, and expressed as beats per minute (bpm).
 A lower variability therefore indicates a smaller difference between the highest and lowest HR during the scan. RR variability percentage was calculated as the absolute RR variability divided by the mean HR during the CTACor acquisition.
 Patients were followed-up up to 30 minutes after the examination to assess the effects of the agents and evaluate the safety status in the event of any possible side effects caused by the examination or its preparation.
 As mentioned earlier, HR and BP levels were measured at the baseline, before the administration of any drugs. HR and BP assessments were repeated 1 minute, 3 minutes and 5 minutes after the administration of the agents.
 Additionally, the HR was measured during the CTACor acquisition (it was not possible to measure the BP at that time) and finally both the HR and BP were measured 10 minutes after the CTACor.
 The HR was measured by the monitor of the electrocardiographic tracing, while the BP was measured with a sphygmomanometer by using the traditional auscultatory method.
 The measurements were conducted with the patient supine on the MDCT scanning table. The study also calculated each patient's HR percentage reduction compared to the respective basal HR, thus normalizing the effects of the drugs on each patient's initial HR, which showed a significant variation.

 The CTACor used a standard image acquisition protocol for MDCT equipment with a 64-detector row (Aquilion 64, Toshiba Medical Systems, Otawara, Japan), and with the injection of nonionic iodinated contrast at the time of acquisition.
 This protocol has been described in a previous work (21). The statistical analysis used the Shapiro-Wilk test to determine whether the distribution was normal. For normal distribution variables, a Student t test for two means with similar variance was used in order to compare the HR in both groups of agents at each moment in time. 
 For nonparametric distribution variables, a Kruskal-Wallis test was used.   Results We selected 126 consecutive patients referred to the MRI and Cardiovascular CT Department of our institution, with a clinical indication of CTACor.
 76 patients were excluded due to one of the following exclusion criteria: current use of any agent that could cause bradycardia or interfere with the conduction of the AV node, a cardiac rhythm other than sinus, HR < 70 bpm. 50 consecutive patients were thus included, 38 males (76%) and 12 females (38%) with a mean age of 57.8 ± 6.7 years.
 Patients were randomly assigned to the Metoprolol (M) and Diltiazem (D) groups, with 25 patients in each group. Only 6 patients (24%) in group D received 0.25 mg/kg of diltiazem, whereas the remaining 19 patients (76%) received a total dose of 0.6mg/kg. The mean diltiazem dose was 0.516 ± 0.15mg/kg. In group M, 8 patients received 5mg, 8 patients received 10mg, and 9 patients received 15 mg of metoprolol. The mean metoprolol dose was 10.2 ± 4.2mg. No patient developed symptoms during or after the administration of the agents. Two patients had frequent ventricular extrasystoles at the baseline, both from group D. After the administration of the agents and during or after the CTACor, four patients had ventricular extrasystoles (the same two patients who had them at the baseline, and two patients without prior arrhythmia, also from group D). One patient from group M showed a significant worsening of sinus arrhythmia during the acquisition, with a significant RT variability of 10 heartbeats, thus impairing the image acquisition. Only one patient from group D had second-degree AVB, Mobitz I 2:1, with no symptoms or hemodynamic effects, which reverted spontaneously during the patient's follow-up (after 10 minutes). The basal HR was similar in the two groups. HR values after 1, 3 and 5 minutes, as well as during the acquisition and after the CTACor, were significantly lower in group M than in group D, particularly after 1, 3 and 5 minutes (table 1). Minimum and maximum HR values are shown in Table 1. Figure 1 shows all the points of all patients with the temporal evolution of HR in both groups. Figure 2 shows the predicted HR curve, using a polynomial fractional fit for each point and its confidence interval, for both groups. If we consider the percentage reduction from basal HR values, we will normalize each patient's initial HR data, which showed a significant variation.
 Thus, HR percentage reduction in group M was only higher than that of group D in the 1st and 3rd minutes; it was no longer significant in the 5th minute, during acquisition and after the CTACor (Table  2). There was a trend toward less variability in Group D's absolute RR variability, whereas percentage variability (RR variability/mean acquisition HR) was statistically lower in group D than in group M during the acquisition.
 (Table 3). Blood pressure behavior is shown in Tables 4, 5 and 6. Blood pressure decreased after the intravenous drug injection and was reestablished in the post-acquisition period.
 BP declines were mild and did not cause any hypotension symptoms in any patient. In general, group D showed lower BP values even at the baseline and remained more hypotensive throughout the monitoring period when compared to group M.   Discussion CTACor tests with intravenous injection of nonionic iodinated contrast allow for a detailed anatomical visualization of the coronary arteries, vascular grafts (breast and saphenous vein) and intra- and extracardiac structures such as valves, thrombi and pericardium.
 As mentioned above, the acquisition and reconstruction of CTACor images is synched with the electrocardiographic waveform. Therefore, optimized image acquisition depends on controlling the patient's HR in order to improve diagnostic quality and administer the lowest possible radiation dose (14, 15).
 With 64-detector devices, patients must have a regular HR, since data are obtained at different heartbeats (usually six to eight) and then combined into a single volume. Therefore, if there are irregularities between RR intervals, the combined data that have been acquired at different stages of the cardiac cycle will result in "steps” and/or motion artifacts.
 Furthermore, low and regular HR values enable the use of dose modulation algorithms connected to the ECG, where the highest X-ray dose is released only during the diastole phase, or even the use of prospective acquisition (with fewer device scans), which may reduce the radiation dose by 60%. By contrast, with state-of-the-art devices, which are not widely available in Brazil yet, image acquisition requires only one or two heartbeats. Nevertheless, the use of negative chronotropic agents is important. Although less critical, controlling the HR is still an almost universal method to take full advantage of its dose reduction capacity, which can be lower than 1mSv (about 10 simple chest X-rays). (22)
 Protocols vary, but the HR target at the time of acquisition is below 65 bpm. If patients reach the examination site with higher HR values, they are invariably given HR control medication. Beta-blockers is the group of agents initially used to control HR values, either orally (by premedication, about one hour before the examination) or intravenously (immediately before the examination).
 However, some studies that analyzed the results of this strategy reported surprisingly high rates (27% to 34%) of patients who did not reach the HR target, even after oral premedication and the maximum dose (20 mg) of the most commonly used intravenous beta-blocker: metoprolol tartrate.
 Furthermore, there was a high number (16%) of patients with some degree of contraindication for this class of agents. All this contributes to the poorer quality of diagnostic images and explains the need for alternative strategies and drugs (23, 24). Contraindications for the use of beta-blockers, selective or not, include advanced atrioventricular blocks, hypotension, asthma, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and clinical instability (16). While there are studies confirming the safety of the chronic use of orally administered low doses of selective beta-blockers in DPOC patients (25), acute intravenous use for CTACor, especially in patients using beta-adrenergics such as bronchodilators, is still considered a contraindication from a clinical and pharmacological point of view, and studies testing this particular situation are not available.
 Calcium-channel blockers, particularly diltiazem, may be used in patients with lung diseases, representing a simple, effective and widely available HR control alternative (16). Calcium-channel blockers reduce conduction through the atrioventricular node and, to a lesser extent, in the sinoatrial node (26). Due to this mechanism, they are the group of choice for the pre-examination control of atrial fibrillation patients (27). They not induce bronchospasm, but have a less intense negative chronotropic effect. Among them, diltiazem should preferably be chosen, since it has a lower negative inotropic effect. The recommended dose of diltiazem is 0.25 mg/kg, IV route, for 2 minutes, and a second 0.35 mg/kg dose may be administered if the HR target is not reached. Our results suggest that the second dose is usually necessary to reach the HR target. Therefore, the first dose can be administered in the preparation room and the second in the examination room. In some clinical practice cases, when the patient arrives at the healthcare facility with high HR values (>90 bpm), we have already calculated, to streamline our administration strategy, the maximum dose of 0.6 mg/kg, and then we infuse the medication within 15 to 20 minutes, diluted in 100 ml of physiological serum. This study was one of the first to investigate, in a controlled manner, this particular use of diltiazem for CTACor and to compare it with beta-blockers. A direct comparison between the major drugs available - metoprolol and diltiazem - is rare in the literature. In the present study we observed a significant HR reduction after 1, 3 and 5 minutes of drug infusion, both in the group of patients who received beta-blockers and in the group that received diltiazem, with greater reduction values in the first group; statistical significance, however, was observed only in the third minute and not the at the end of the infusion. We have also observed that it is safe to use diltiazem in this CTACor context. Blood pressure after the test was equal in both groups (despite the theoretically larger vasodilation with the calcium-channel blocker) and there was no evidence of major HR disturbances. A rather important and unique aspect of the data in this study was that patients receiving diltiazem had a significantly lower RR interval during CTACor acquisition, which is a potential further advantage for CTACor imaging quality, particularly in 64-row detector devices. The combined use of beta-blockers and diltiazem is not recommended for routine practice, since it can cause bradyarrhythmias. In selected patients, however, some specialized centers associate a dose of 0.25 mg/kg of diltiazem when the maximum beta-blocker dose is reached and the HR remains well above the target, allowing the acquisition to take place below 70 bpm, without any reported complications. In this case, the patient remains under observation after the test, during the elimination half-life of diltiazem, which is 3.5 to 4.5 hours (authors' personal experience). Every center that carries out the examination must be prepared, with equipment and personnel specializing in advanced cardiology life support, to handle potential complications such as hypotension and bradycardia. The basic treatment includes volume administration and lower-limb elevation. Antidotes such as Glucagon (for beta-blockers) and gluconate or calcium chloride should also be available, in addition to atropine and vasoactive amines, for extremely serious cases, which fortunately are very rare. In short, there was a significant HR decrease in both groups, with a more pronounced reduction in the metoprolol group. On the other hand, the lower RR variability obtained during the acquisition with diltiazem, together with its coronary vasodilatory effect, is an inherent characteristic of the drug, which may offer advantages over the classical use of beta-blockers.
 It is important to note, however, that in the present study we did not conduct a direct evaluation of the imaging quality obtained in the two groups. Since there are several studies showing a direct correlation between HR reduction and the final imaging quality (13-15), we decided in this study to restrict our research to an indirect assessment of the effect of HR control agents on the final imaging quality. Nevertheless, it is important to acknowledge that this is an important limitation, and that further studies should be conducted in order to specify the relationship between different HR control drugs and the final imaging quality. We would then have definitive proof that diltiazem is an effective alternative to beta-blockers in this clinical context. Finally, the present randomized clinical trial showed that, in the clinical context of CTACor tests, HR reduction values were greater with metoprolol than with diltiazem. Diltiazem showed lower RR variability than metoprolol during the image acquisition process, which is also associated with better imaging quality. Above all, diltiazem proved to be an effective and safe HR reduction alternative to beta-blockers before performing computed tomography angiography of the coronary arteries. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare that there is no pertinent conflict of interest, except for Drs. Carlos Rochitte and Guilherme Santana Nunes Azevedo, who were paid by the Baldacci Laboratory, producer of Balcor (Diltiazem), to prepare a paper on Coronary CT. Funding Sources This study was partially funded by Fundação Zerbini. Academic Association This study is not associated with postgraduate programs.
   