 SUMMARY background: the reduction of THE heart rate (HR) in the angiography ct scan of the coronary arteries (ATCCor) is critical to the quality of the image. The efficacy of the calcium blockers as alternatives for patients with contraindications to beta-blockers has not been defined. OBJECTIVES: to Compare the efficacy in the reduction of HR variability and RR of metoprolol and diltiazem in ATCCor. METHODS: the Study was prospective, randomized, open-label, included patients with clinical indication of ATCCor, in sinus rhythm with HR>70bpm and without the use of agents that interfere with the FC. Fifty patients were randomized to the groups: metoprolol IV 5-15 mg or up to HR≤60 bpm(M), and diltiazem IV 0.25 to 0,60 mg/kg or up to HR≤60 bpm (D). Blood pressure (bp) and HR were measured in the condition baseline, 1min, 3min and 5min after agents, in the acquisition and after ATCCor. RESULTS: THE reduction of HR in absolute values was higher in group M than in group D (1, 3, 5 min, acquisition and post-test). The percentage reduction in HR was significantly larger in group M only in the 1 min and 3 min after the beginning of the agents. There was no difference in 5 min during the acquisition and after the examination. RR variability percentage of group D was statistically lower than group M during the acquisition (variability of RR/ hr average HR of the acquisition). A single case of BAV, 2:1 Mobitz I, reverted spontaneously occurred (group D). CONCLUSION: we Conclude that diltiazem is an alternative effective and safe to beta-blockers in the reduction of HR in performing angiography by computed tomography of the coronary arteries. (Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012; [online].ahead print, PP.0-0) key Words: Diltiazem; blockers of channels of calcium; coronary angiography; tomography; coronary vessels. Introduction Images of the coronary arteries are the key elements for the management decisions in patients with Coronary Artery Disease (cad) already known or suspected. The classic method for obtaining images of the coronary arteries is the catheterization invasive or coronary angiography, which, as an invasive procedure, comes added risk of complications is not negligible, and so are indicated in specific cases of high suspicion of DAC or situations of acute presentation of this doença1. Recently, a new method of assessment is not invasive of the coronary arteries, using equipment of computer tomography is able to visualize the lumen and the wall of the arteries coronarianas2-5. This method was developed with the advent of computerized tomography scans of multiple columns of detectors (MDCT), which allowed acquisitions are much faster of the images; therefore, the visualization of the coronary arteries as static images without motion artifacts-significant. While publications of multicentre studies and international validated this tecnologia6-8, demonstrating high accuracy in relation to catheterization, several guidelines and consensus documents nacionais9 and internacionais10 reinforce the point that angiography by computed tomography of the coronary arteries (ATCCor) has important clinical indications current, including: patients with pre-test probability of CAD intermediate incapable of exercising; patients with examination of the image prior doubtful or discordant with the framework clínico11; evaluation of chest pain in the emergency room in patients with pre-test probability low or intermediate and with normal ECG or doubtful, and markers of myocardial necrosis ("enzymes") normal or doubtful; evaluation of suspected abnormalities coronary heart, among other information of great clinical relevance. Despite, however, the better temporal resolution of the equipment tomography current, heart rate (HR) of the patient during acquisition of the images of ATCCor still need to be around 60 beats per minute (<65 bpm) so that the image quality is great and/or so that the radiation dose is the lowest possível12,13.In addition, the range RR should be also regular for optimum image quality, and the irregularity of the heartbeat, as extrassístoles or atrial fibrillation, extremely damaging to the image acquisition in the ATCCor14,15.In the current routine of performing this examination in order to obtain the reduction of FC in the ATCCor by the preferential use of beta-blockers, is in administration via the oral, is injecting. Intravenous use has been preferred by most of the services in Brazil through its ease of use, security, and speed of action, allowing a quick flow of patients through the equipment of MDCT. In the reduction of FC for the examination of ATCCor, the calcium channel blockers are alternatives to beta-blockers to patients with contraindications to esses16. The beta-blockers, the same effect selective B1, are contraindicados in patients with severe asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease severe, in particular with episodes of broncoconstricção or use of broncodilatadores17,18. The use of acute beta-blockers is also contraindicated in cases of chf decompensated arterial hypotension (systolic pressure < 100mmHg, atrioventricular block, advanced aortic stenosis, severe diabetes at risk of hypoglycaemia and peripheral artery disease (severe ex. : intermittent claudication or raynaud's disease).Of all the contraindications mentioned above,the lung diseases are the most commonly encountered in clinical practice and complication of the crisis of broncoconstricção serious associated with the use of acute beta-blocker one of the most feared. One of the alternatives to beta-blockers for the reduction of FC in the ATCCor and that you have no contraindication in patients with pulmonary disease broncoconstrictiva are the calcium channel blockers nãodiidropiridinas, such as verapamil (fenilaquilaminas) and diltiazem (benzothiazepines)19. However, although cited in numerous texts as an alternative to beta-blockers, the efficacy of calcium blockers used in the reduction of the FC prior to the examination of ATCCor has not been clearly defined, and comparative data are still missing. Another potential drug for the reduction of FC in this clinical situation is the ivabradina, that is only available in oral form in Brazil, being its formulation intravenous not yet available for clinical use. We participate in international study with the ivabradina for administration intravenous, having this shown good results in the reduction of FC at the time of the completion of ATCCor20. In the present study, therefore, our objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of the diltiazemna reduction of the FCe of the variability of interval RR when compared to the metoprololem patients referred to the achievement of ATCCor. The methods we've outlined a prospective study, randomized (1:1) and open. Patients with clinical indication of ATCCor, in sinus rhythm with HR > 70bpm were included and randomized to recebermetoprolol or diltiazem intravenous. The metoprolol (tartrate de metoprolol, Seloken®) was used at a dose of 5 mg in intravenous injection slow, repeated up to achieve HR ≤ 60 bpm or a maximum dose of 15mg. Diltiazem (hydrochloride diltiazem Balcor®) was used at a dose of 0.25 mg/kg in 2 minutes, and if HR > 60bpm, additional dose of 0.35 mg/kg in 2 minutes. Were excluded patients in the use of agents that interfere with the FC. Thus, we have excluded all those that were in prior use of beta-blockers, calcium blockers, or any other agent that might interfere in the conduct of the node The-V or amend the FC. All the patients signed a term of free and informed consent, and the study was approved by the ethics committee of the institution. The basal FC, as well as the pressures arterial systolic, diastólicas and averages (PA) were measured before and after 1min, 3min and 5minda infusion of the agents. All measures were repeated after the completion of the ATCCor. RR variability was measured during acquisition of the exam, using the trace eletrocardiográfico of beats recorded during acquisition of the images, provided by the equipment of tomography, in general, an ECG trace for the 8 to 12 seconds of acquisition (8 to 12 beats). RR variability in the absolute was defined as the difference between the highest and lowest FC, or the highest and the lowest range RR, and expressed as beats per minute (bpm). Thus, a smaller variability indicates less difference between HR minimum and maximum during the acquisition. RR variability percentage was calculated as RR variability absolute divided by the average HR, during the acquisition of the ATCCor. The patients were followed until 30 minutes after the completion of the examination for follow-up of the effects of the agents and the evaluation of the safety in the case of possible side-effects caused by the examination or preparation. As mentioned previously, the HR and bp were measured in the condition baseline, before administration of any medicine. The assessment of HR and PA were repeated at 1min, 3min and 5min after start of the infusion of the agents. In addition, the HR was measured during the acquisition of the ATCCor (at that time it was not possible to measure of PA) and, finally, both the FC and the PA have been re-measurements 10 min after the end of the ATCCor. The HR was measured by the monitor circuit eletrocardiográfico and the PA, measured with a sphygmomanometer using the auscultatory method traditional. The measurements were performed with the patient supine on the table of the equipment of MDCT. It was also calculated the percentage reduction of the HR in relation to the basal FC of each patient, in this way, by normalizing the effects of the drugs to the FC initial each patient, which presented significant variation. The ATCCor used a standard protocol of image acquisition of MDCT with 64 columns of detectors (Aquilion 64, Toshiba Medical System, Otawara, Japan) and with injection of iodinated contrast non-ionic at the time of purchase. This protocol is described in the work prévio21. Statistical analysis we used Shapiro-Wilk test to determine if the distribution was normal. For variables with normal distribution, Student's t-test for two means with variance similar was used for the comparison between HR in the two groups of agents at each moment in time. For variables with distribution non-parametric test was used Kruskal-Wallis. Results Were selected from 126 consecutive patients referred to the Sector of Magnetic Resonance imaging and Computed Tomography Cardiovascular of our institution, with clinical indication of ATCCor. Seventy six patients were excluded for presenting any exclusion criteria: current use of any agent that would cause bradycardia or interfere in the conduct of the knot AV, cardiac rhythm other than sinus, HR < 70 bpm. Have been so included 50 consecutive patients, including 38 males (76%) and 12 women (38%) and average age from 57.8± 6.7 years. The patients were randomized to the group Metoprolol (M) or Diltiazem (D), with 25 patients in each group. Only six patients (24%) of group D were given 0.25 mg/kg diltiazem, and the demais19 patients (76%) received a total dose of 0.6 mg/kg. The average dose of diltiazem was 0,516± 0.15 mg/kg. In group M, eight patients received 5 mg, eight patients received 10 mg and nine patients received 15 mg of metoprolol. The mean dose of metoprolol was 10.2±4.2 mg. No patient presented symptoms during or after infusion of the agents. Two patients presented extrassístoles ventricular frequent in the condition a priori, both in group D. After infusion of the agents, and during or after the acquisition of ATCCor; four patients had extrassístoles ventricular (the same two patients who presented with the condition the baseline and two more patients without arrhythmia prior, also those of group D). One patient in group M presented a significant accentuation of sinus arrhythmia during acquisition, with significant variability in RR of 10 beats, in this way impairing the image acquisition. A single patient from group D presented AV block 2° degree, 2:1Mobitz I, without any symptoms or hemodynamic effect and that reverted spontaneously during the observation of the patient (after 10 minutes). The basal FC was similar among the groups. The FC in the times of 1min, 3min, 5min, acquisition and post-ATCCor were significantly lower in group M compared to group D, especially at 1min, 3min and 5min (table 1). The FC minimum and maximum are illustrated in table 1. Figure 1 shows all the points of all the patients with the temporal evolution of the HR in both groups. Figure 2 shows the curve of FC predicted using polynomial fit fractional, for each point and its confidence interval, for both groups. If we consider the percentage reduction in relation to the basal FC we will be normalizing the data for FC initial each patient, which presented significant variation. Thus, the percentage reduction in HR was greater in group M than in D, only in the first and third minutes, not being the most significant in the fifth minute, acquisition and post-ATCCor (tab. 2). RR variability in the absolute showed a tendency for less variability in the group D, while the variability percentage (variability in RR/ hr average HR of the acquisition) was statistically lower in group D than in M during the acquisition (tab. 3). The behavior of arterial pressure is demonstrated in tables 4, 5 and 6. After the beginning of intravenous injection of drugs the PA reduced and returned to recover in the period post-acquisition. The falls of PA have been discrete and has not resulted in any symptoms of hypotension in any patient. In general, the group D presented PA more low even at baseline, and remained more low blood pressure during the whole monitoring period in relation to the group M. Discussion the examinations of ATCCor, by the intravenous injection of iodinated contrast nãoiônico, allows for the visualization of anatomical detail of the coronary arteries, grafts, vascular (breast and bridges of the heart) and structures on intra and extracardíacas, such as the valves, the thrombus and the pericardium. As mentioned previously, the acquisition and reconstruction of images ATCCor are carried out synchronized to the signal eletrocardiográfico. Therefore, the acquisition optimized images passes by the control of the HR of the patients, with an aim of better diagnostic quality and the use of the lowest dose of radiation possível14,15. In the apparatus 64 detectors, patients should have the FC regular, since the data are obtained in different beats (usually six to eight), and then combined into a single volume. So, if there is irregularity between the intervals RR, the combined data that were acquired in different phases of the cardiac cycle will result in "steps" and/or motion artifacts. In addition, the CF low and regular, enables the use of algorithms of modulation of dose related to the ECG, where the larger dose of X-ray is released only during diastole, or even the use of acquisition forward-looking (with less shots of the instrument), which can reduce the radiation dose by up to 60%. Already in the equipment of last generation, which are still seldom available on a national level, the acquisition of the images is done during only one or two beats. Still, the use of agents cronotrópicos negative is important. Although less crucial, the control of the FC is still used almost universally, so as to take maximum advantage of its ability to dose reduction, which can reach to be less than 1mSv (about 10 plain x-rays of the chest)22. The protocols vary according to the services, but they have it as a FC target, at the time of purchase, values below 65 bpm. If the patient arrive at the location of the exam with your HR above this value, invariably you will receive medication to control the FC. The group of agents initially used for control of HR is that of the beta-blockers, by means of pre-medication, orally, about an hour before the exam, or intravenously, immediately before the commencement of the examination. However, few studies have examined the performance of this strategy and have found the rates surprisingly high (27% to 34%) of patients who did not reach the FC target, even after the pre-oral medication and the use of the maximum dose (20 mg) of beta-blocker intravenous commonly more used, the tartrate of metoprolol. In addition, we observed a high number (16 %) of patients with some degree of contraindication to the use of this class of agents. All of this contributes to a worse diagnostic quality of the images and explains the need to have strategies and drugs alternativos23,24. Are contraindications for the use of beta-blockers, selective or not, the presence of block atrioventricular advanced, hypotension, asthma, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and instability clínica16. Although there are papers attesting to the safety of the chronic use of beta-blockers selective at low dose and oral route in patients with DPOC25, the intravenous use of acute to the ATCCor, especially in patients using a beta-adrenergic such as bronchodilators, it is still considered from the point of view of the clinical and pharmacological as a contraindication, and studies in the literature testing this specific situation are not available. The calcium channels blockers, especially diltiazem, may be used in cases of patients with lung diseases, constituting a simple, effective, and widely available for the control of the FC16. Calcium channel blockers decrease conduction through the atrioventricular node and, to a lesser extent, in the nósinoatrial26. By this mechanism, are the group of choice for the control pre-examination of patients with fibrillation atrial27. Do not induce bronchospasm, but have no effect chronotropic negative less intense. Among them, the diltiazem should be preferably chosen, for presenting a less negative inotropic effect. The prescribed dose of diltiazem is 0.25 mg/ kg, iv, in 2 minutes and can be done a second dose of 0.35 mg/kg if the FC target is not reached. Our results suggest that the second dose is usually required to achieve the FC targets. So, we can make the first dose in the room of preparation, and the second, already in the exam room. In some cases, in clinical routine, when the patient arrives in the service with CF high (>90 bpm), to facilitate the administration strategy, since we calculate a maximum dose of 0.6 mg/kg, and when we infuse the medication in 15 to 20 minutes, diluted in 100 mL of physiological serum. This study was one of the first to investigate in a controlled way the use of diltiazem in this application for ATCCor and compare with the beta-blocker. The direct comparison between the main drugs, metoprolol and diltiazem, it is scarce in the literature. In the present study we observed the significant reduction of HR after 1, 3 and 5 minutes of infusion of the drugs, both in the group of patients who received a beta-blocker such as in the group that received diltiazem, with a greater reduction in the first, but only with statistical significance in the third minute, and not at the end of the infusion. We also note safety in the use of diltiazem in the context of ATCCor. The blood pressure after the exam was equal in the two groups (despite the theoretical increased vasodilation with the blocker calcium channel) and there was no record of disturbances major in the heart rhythm. A given quite original and important of the data investigated in this study was that the patients receiving diltiazem had a significantly lower variability of interval RR, during the acquisition of the ATCCor, which potentially adds an advantage in the quality of the acquired images in angiotomografia of coronary disease, particularly in equipment of 64 columns of detectors. The combined use of beta-blockers and diltiazem is not recommended in the routine, by the potential to cause bradyarrhythmias. However, in some specialist centres and in selected patients, when it reaches the maximum dose of a beta-blocker and the FC remains very much above the target, has been associated with a dose of 0.25 mg/kg diltiazem, able to carry out the acquisition below 70 bpm, without registration uneventful. In this case, the patient is under observation after the examination, by the time the half-life of elimination of diltiazem, which is 3.5 to 4.5 hours (personal experience of authors). Any center that conducts the exam needs to be prepared, with equipment and staff trained in advanced life support in cardiology, to treat potential complications, such as hypotension and bradycardia. The basic treatment includes the administration of volume and elevation of the lower limbs. The antidote glucagon (beta-blockers) and gluconate or calcium chloride should also be available, in addition to atropine and amines vasoactive, for cases of extreme gravity, which fortunately are very rare. In short, there was a decrease efficient of the HR in both groups, with a greater decrease in the group metoprolol. In turn, the lower the variability of RR during the acquisition of the examination demonstrated with diltiazem and linked to its vasodilator effect the coronary artery, is a characteristic inherent to the drug that may offer advantages compared to the classic use of a beta-blocker. It is important to emphasize, however, that in the present study, we have not made a direct evaluation of the quality of the images obtained in the two groups. As there are already several studies demonstrating a direct relationship between the degree of reduction of the FC and the final quality of the imagens13-15, in the present study we chose to limit our investigation to an indirect valuation of the effect of the control agents of the FC on the final quality of the images. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that this issue represents an important limitation, and that it would be very desirable that new studies be conducted to clarify more specifically the relationship between the type of medicine used for control of FC, and the final quality of the images. In this way, we would have the definite proof of which diltiazem represents an effective alternative to beta-blockers in this clinical context. Finally, the present randomized clinical trial allowed us to conclude that, in the clinical situation of the conduct of the examinations of ATCCor, the reduction of HR was greater with metoprololdo that with diltiazem. Diltiazem showed less variability in RR during the acquisition of images compared to metoprolol, which also associates with the best image quality. Especially, the diltiazem was shown as an alternative effective and safe to beta-blockers in the reduction of the FC prior to performing angiography by computed tomography of the coronary arteries Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflict of interests relevant, with the exception of the authors Drs. Carlos Rochitte and Guilherme Santana Nunes Azevedo, because they receive fees for drafting the text of Computed Tomography Coronary Laboratory Baldacci, producer of the Balcor (Diltiazem). Sources of Funding this study was partially funded by Fundação Zerbini. Linking Academic there is No linking of this study the post-graduate programs. 