OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the radiological characteristics of conglomerate masses computed tomography scan of the chest. METHODS: 75 silicosis patients were selected, most blasters sand, patients with progressive massive fibrosis seen at Antonio Pedro University Hospital between 1986 and 2004. Patients underwent clinical evaluation, chest X-ray and CT scan high resolution. RESULTS: More than half of patients with silicosis revealed large opacities chest radiograph of types B and C, indicating the severity of the disease in these patients. Of the 75 cases, only one unilateral mass simulating lung cancer. Forty-four patients underwent computed tomography scan of the chest. The masses predominated in the upper and posterior thirds (88.6%). Air bronchogram and calcifications within the masses were observed in 70.4% of cases and 63.8%, respectively. history of tuberculosis was reported in 52% of patients. CONCLUSION: In most cases the masses were bilateral, predominantly in the posterolateral upper regions of the lungs with air bronchograms and calcifications. Association with lymph node calcifications was a frequent finding. Exposure to high concentrations of dust and tuberculosis were considered risk factors for the development of progressive massive fibrosis. Key words: Pulmonary fibrosis; Silicosis; Silicon dioxide; Occupational diseases; environmental exposure; computed tomography x-ray INTRODUCTION Silicosis is a lung disease caused by inhalation of crystalline silica that induces tissue reaction fibrogenic character.(1) Clinical symptoms can be divided into three evolutionary forms: chronic, accelerated and acute.(2) The chronic form is more common and occurs after many years of exposure to relatively low levels of dust. Accelerated silicosis is a clinical term applied to a condition that has the progression of intermediate speed between acute silicosis to the classic chronic nodular disease, requiring an average of five to ten years of exposure to dust for the appearance of radiological changes.(3) The acute form of the disease is quite rare, striking workers exposed to exceptionally high concentrations of fine particles of recently crushed crystalline silica as occurs in sandblasting and grinding stone.(4) The radiological manifestations of silicosis vary in different clinical forms. Simple silicosis is characterized by the presence of multiple nodules, ranging from 1 to 10 mm in diameter, with a predominant distribution in the upper and posterior regions of the upper lobes. Nodules tend to be circumscribed, uniform density and are generally symmetrical. Occasionally can calcify, tending to subpleural location. Lymph node enlargement is common and may precede the onset of diffuse nodularity. The periphery of the hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes may calcify. This appearance was called calcification in eggshell.(5) The complicated silicosis is characterized by the presence of large opacities with homogenous areas of consolidation, distribution not target mainly affecting the upper and middle of the lungs. Results from the confluence of small fibrotic nodules that become larger than 10 mm in diameter. The silicosis is also known as progressive massive fibrosis (PMF), a term first used by Fletcher in 1948 for pneumoconiosis that evolved from the simple to the complicated forms.(6) The FMP is basically pneumoconiosis in coal miners and silicosis, being rarer in other pneumoconiosis. From the point of view of Pathology, by definition, the lesion is at least 2 cm in diameter in histological tissue sections. However, the International Classification of pneumoconiosis radiographs of the International Labour Organization considers PMF any pulmonary opacity exceeding 1 cm in diameter at chest radiography.(7) The main symptom of silicosis is progressive, disabling dyspnea. In advanced stages of the disease may have frank frame respiratory failure, weight loss and weakness, leaving the patient susceptible to lower respiratory tract infections. More often, patients with accelerated silicosis progress to complicated form of the disease with which large fibrous masses.(8) The main complication of silicosis is tuberculosis. Susceptibility to tuberculosis appears to result from a combination of factors, highlighting a possible chemical effects of silica on the bacterial growth, macrophage toxicity and greater permanence of bacilli in lung tissue due to lymphatic drainage.(9) The incidence of tuberculosis is higher in silicosis patients whose disease was complicated by FMP, compared to those with the simple form of the disease. This association aggravates the development of pneumoconiosis.(10) The objective of this study was to evaluate the radiological characteristics of conglomerate masses computed tomography scan of the chest (HRCT).   METHODS review the 312 records file maintained by the Occupational Lung Diseases Clinic of staff of the University Hospital Antônio Pedro patients with a history of exposure to silica was conducted from January 1986 to July 2004. Of the 189 patients with silicosis Occupational confirmed by history and radiographic changes consistent with the disease, they were selected 75 cases with the complicated form of the disease characterized by the presence of large opacities greater than 1 cm in the lung parenchyma. Chest radiographs were performed at the University Hospital Radiology Department Antônio Pedro, within the technical requirements, using high kilovolts and a short exposure time, the distance between focus and 180 cm film in the anteroposterior position (International Labour Organization , 1980). The HRCT scans were performed with a high resolution technique in CETEMAX 640 appliances (GE) and Asteion (Toshiba). The International Classification of Radiographs of Pneumoconiosis of the International Labour Organization, 1980 (11) was used for classification and comparative interpretation of radiographs with the supplied patterns. Large opacities were classified as type A, when there was opaque with the largest diameter between 1 and 5 cm or more opacity diameter less than 1 cm, but the sum of the diameters is less than 5 cm; type B, when the combined diameters of one or more opacities greater than 5 cm, but the total area is smaller than the upper third of the right lung; type C, when the area presenting the large opacities the upper third of the right lung. For patients who underwent HRCT the following masses were analyzed: location, cavitations, air bronchogram and calcification within them. We evaluated the presence of emphysema adjacent to the masses and lymph node calcification. Other variables also were considered: age, occupation, length of exposure to silica dust and association with tuberculosis.   RESULTS All 75 patients with silicosis were male, with a mean age of 43 years and the youngest 28 and the oldest 76 years. The average exposure time was 14.2 years, the shortest exposure seven months and longer than 38 years. Of the 75 patients, 62 were sand blasters (82.6%), 11 marteleteiros (14.6%), 1 welder (1.4%) and 1 esmerilhador (1.4%). As for the association with tuberculosis, 39 patients reported pulmonary tuberculosis history (52%). Of these, 37 developed the disease during exposure to silica. The diagnosis was confirmed in 31 cases: Direct sputum smear microscopy (24 cases), mycobacterial culture of sputum (3 cases), mycobacterial culture of bronchoalveolar lavage (1 case), histopathology (3 cases). In 8 patients had clinical and radiological suspicion with response to specific treatment. The radiological classification of large opacities on chest radiography was found that 23 patients had large opacity of type A (30.7%), 25 Type B (33.3%) and 27 Type C (36%) (Figures 1A and 1B). Of the cases analyzed, 74 presented bilateral conglomerate masses, whereas only 1 presented unilateral lesion (Figures 2A and 2B).         Of the 75 patients with PMF, 44 underwent chest HRCT. As for the characteristics of the mass analyzed by chest HRCT it was found that 88.6% predominated in the upper thirds and were later. Excavations were observed in 18.18% of the masses, air bronchogram 70.4% and calcification within the same in 63.6% of them. Emphysema around the mass was observed in 72.7% and lymph node calcification in 81.8% of cases (Figures 3A and 3B).     DISCUSSION Silicosis is the most prevalent pneumoconiosis in Brazil and worldwide. Interest in this disease was awakened by the realization of its high incidence in shipyard workers from the seafront of Guanabara Bay (Niterói - RJ) who sought care in hospitals in the region. These patients generally exposed to exceptionally high concentrations of silica particles, develop accelerated form of the disease and, more often, evolve to the complicated way in which large fibrous masses that distort and destroy the lung architecture.(12) In this study, sandblasting was the occupation responsible for the largest number of cases of the disease (82.6%). The prevalence rate of PMF among those patients was quite high (39.7%), showing the importance of exposure to high concentrations of dust as a risk factor for the development of this form of disease. Some authors (10) reported 92 cases of PMF and also reported the importance of the quantity of dust to the development of severe pneumoconiosis. Others (13) studied 733 patients with silicosis patients with PMF, they found that the most significant risk factors associated with this form of the disease were high levels of exposure to dust, a history of tuberculosis and high profusion of small opacities on chest radiograph . In the present study, the association of PMF tuberculosis was found in 52% of patients, which confirms the importance of tuberculous infection as a risk factor for the development of FMP. It is known that silicosis is a risk factor for tuberculosis.(14) Some authors (15) reported high prevalence of tuberculosis in silicosis sandblasters (34%). The diagnosis of tuberculosis in patients with silicosis can be extremely difficult to establish, especially when the chest X-ray reveals the complicated form of the disease. TB should be suspected in the presence of systemic symptoms (although they may be part of silicosis) and in cases of radiological findings suggestive of tuberculosis, as a rapid emergence of new opacities and pleural effusion and excavations.(16) The complicated silicosis is characterized in simple chest X-ray for large opacities with more than 1 cm in diameter with homogeneous areas of distribution consolidation not target mainly affecting the upper fields. The lesions tend to form in the periphery, migrating toward the hilum, creating a zone of emphysematous lung tissue between the consolidation and the pleural surface. The edges of large opacities are irregular and poorly defined. With the advance of the disease, the masses tend to contract, emphysema and emerging bubbles around and the lung bases. The lungs lose volume gradually. The great masses of silicosis can dig, due to ischemia and necrosis. The excavation, however, is relatively infrequent in silicosis and when it occurs, you must first think of tuberculosis. The frequently observed pleural thickening in tuberculosis is also common in PMF, although pleural effusion is extremely rare.(17) The greater the profusion of nodules on chest radiography (categories 2 and 3), the greater the chance of progression to FMP. In general the chest radiograph shows massive pulmonary opacities in diffuse lung nodulation background. However, PMF has been reported in the absence of pulmonary nodule formation, due to reduced visibility of silicosis nodules, their incorporation within the fibrous mass.(18) More than half of patients with silicosis showed large chest X-ray opacities of types B and C, which indicates the severity of the disease in these patients. Of all the analyzed cases (n = 75), only one had a large unilateral opacity mimicking a tumor and the diagnosis of silicosis done through thoracotomy with lung biopsy in the open. solitary lesions FMP are often confused with lung cancer. Considering the higher incidence of lung cancer in these patients, it is important to take a diagnostic approach to effectively differentiate malignant lesions from benign pneumoconiosis.(19) In this study, the chest HRCT large opacities predominated in the upper and posterior thirds of the lungs (88.6%). air bronchograms and calcifications within the masses occurred in more than half of patients. Lymph nodes hilar and mediastinal calcified were observed in 81% of cases, 25% of the eggshell type. Only 8 cases displayed cavitation within the masses, and 6 of them had associated tuberculosis. Some authors (20) have described sparse calcifications within PMF masses resulting from silicosis, and others (21) reported lymph node calcification in 26 of 49 cases of silicosis studied, 12.2% of the eggshell type, and this manifestation radiation was much more frequent in accelerated silicosis than in simple nodular. Other authors (22) studied the radiological evolution of 141 silicosis patients with serial radiographs and found that radiological progression occurred more often in patients with large opacities on the initial radiographs and who had tuberculosis. In this study, exposure to high concentrations of dust in the workplace and the high prevalence of tuberculosis in these patients may have contributed greatly to the high percentage of cases evolved to PMF. Given that silicosis is a progressive fibrosing occupational disease, and that cases of silicosis are more likely to radiological progression and develop more frequently with impaired lung function and premature death, it is essential to avoid the risk factors contribute to the development of this form of the disease.   