 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Assess the characteristics of radiological of the masses conglomeradas by high resolution computed tomography of the thorax. METHODS: we selected 75 patients silicóticos, most jateadores sand, cf-massive progressive-patients at Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro, between 1986 and 2004. The patients were submitted to clinical evaluation, plain chest radiograph and high resolution computed tomography. RESULTS: More than half of the patients with complicated silicosis showed in chest radiography large opacities of types B and C, denoting the severity of the disease in these patients. Of the 75 cases, only one presented a mass unilateral simulating lung cancer. Forty-four patients underwent high resolution computed tomography of the chest. The masses predominated in thirds higher, and later (88,6%). Broncograma air, and calcifications in the interior of the mass were observed in 70,4% and to 63.8% of cases, respectively. History of tuberculosis was reported in 52% of patients studied. CONCLUSION: In the great majority of cases the masses were bilateral, predominantly in the regions póstero-superior of the lungs, with broncogramas air and calcifications in between. Association with calcifications linfonodais was a find frequent. Exposure to high concentrations of dust and tuberculosis were considered risk factors for the development of fibrosis and massive progressive. Descriptors: pulmonary Fibrosis; Silicosis; silicon Dioxide; occupational Diseases; environmental Exposure; computed Tomography x-ray INTRODUCTION silicosis is a lung disease caused by inhalation of crystalline silica that induces reaction to the tissue of character fibrogênico. (1) Clinically can be divided in three ways the development: chronic, accelerated and acute. (2) The chronic form is most common and occurs after many years of exposure to relatively low levels of dust. Silicosis accelerated is a clinical term applied to a condition that has the speed of the intermediate progression between silicosis acute and chronic nodular chronic classic, requiring, on average, five to ten years of exposure to dust for the appearance of radiological changes. (3) the acute form of The disease is quite rare and occurs in workers exposed to concentrations exceptionally high fine particles of crystalline silica has recently fractured, such as occurs in sand blasting and grinding stone. (4) The manifestations and radiology of silicosis vary in the different clinical forms. Silicosis simple is characterized by the presence of multiple nodules, ranging from 1 to 10 mm in diameter, with the distribution prevailing in the regions posterior and superior of the wolves higher. The nodules tend to be circumscribed, uniformly dense, and are usually symmetrical. May occasionally calcify, with a tendency to location subpleural. The enlargement of lymph nodes is common and may precede the appearance of nodularity, diffuse. The periphery of the lymph nodes hilares and mediastinais can calcify. This appearance has been called the calcification of egg shell. (5) To complicated silicosis is characterized by the presence of large opacities, with areas of homogeneous consolidation, distribution to target, affecting mainly the portions of the top and middle of the lungs. Results from the confluence of the small nodules fibróticos that become larger than 10 mm in diameter. The complicated silicosis is also referred to as fibrosis massive progressive (FMP), a term first used by Fletcher, in 1948, to the forms that evolved from simple forms to complicated forms. (6) THE FMP occurs basically in the pneumoconiosis of coal miners and silicosis, being more rare in other forms. From the point of view of Pathology, by definition, the lesion has at least 2 cm in diameter on histological sections of tissue. However, the international classification of radiographs of forms of the International Labor Organization considers fibrosis massive progressive any opacification in lung that may exceed 1 cm in diameter on chest radiography. (7) The main symptom of silicosis complicated is the dyspnea is progressive and disabling. In the advanced stages of the disease, can present the framework of frank respiratory insufficiency, weight loss and weakness, leaving the patient susceptible to infections of the lower respiratory tract. With increasing frequency, patients with silicosis accelerated progress to the complicated form of the disease, with the formation of large masses fibróticas. (8) The main complication of silicosis is tuberculosis. Susceptibility to tb seems to be the result of a combination of factors, highlighting a possible chemical effect of silica on the growth bacilar, toxicity, macrophage, and a greater permanence of the bacilli in the lung tissue by difficulty in lymphatic drainage. (9) The incidence of tuberculosis is greater in patients silicóticos whose disease was complicated by the FMP, when compared with the carriers of the simple form of the disease. This association contributed to the evolution of pneumoconiosis. (10) The objective of this work was to assess the characteristics of radiological of the masses conglomeradas by high resolution computed tomography of chest (HRCT). METHODS we performed a review in the 312 chips file maintained by the staff of the Clinic of pulmonary disease Occupational of the University Hospital Antônio Pedro of patients with a history of exposure to silica, in the period from January 1986 to July 2004. Of the 189 patients with silicosis confirmed by the history of occupational and radiological alterations compatible with the disease, were selected 75 cases that had the complicated form of the disease, characterized by the presence of large opacities, greater than 1 cm in the lung parenchyma. Chest radiographs were performed in the Radiology Service of the Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro, within the technical requirements, using high-quilovoltagem and short exposure time, the distance between focus and film of 180 cm in the position póstero-anterior (International Labour Organization, 1980). The ct scans of the thorax were performed with the technique of high resolution, devices CETEMAX 640 (GE) and Asteion (Toshiba). The International Classification of Radiographs of Forms of the International Labor Organization, 1980,(11) was used for classification and interpretation of the comparative of the x-rays with the defaults provided. The large opacities were classified into: type A, when there was opacity with the largest diameter between 1 and 5 cm, or more of an opacity with a diameter equal to or greater than 1 cm, but with the sum of diameters less than 5 cm; type B, when the diameter of the combined one or more opacities was greater than 5 cm, however the total area was less than the upper third of the right lung; and type C, when the area concerning the large opacities exceeded the upper third of the right lung. In patients who underwent HRCT were analyzed the following characteristics of the masses: location, the presence of the excavation, the broncograma air and calcification in the interior of the same. Also were evaluated the presence of emphysema adjacent to the masses and calcification of lymph nodes. Other variables considered were: age, profession, length of exposure to silica dust and their association with tuberculosis. RESULTS All 75 patients with complicated silicosis were male, with a mean age of 43 years, with the youngest 28 and the oldest 76 years old. The average time of the exposure to silica was 14.2 years, and the shortest exposure of seven months, and the more extended is 38 years old. Of the 75 patients, 62 were jateadores sand (82,6%), 11 marteleteiros (14,6%), 1 welder (1,4%) and 1 esmerilhador (1,4%). As for the association with tuberculosis, 39 patients reported a history of pulmonary tuberculosis (52%). Of these, 37 have developed the disease during the exposure to silica. The diagnosis was confirmed in 31 cases: smear direct from sputum (24 cases), culture for mycobacteria from sputum (3 cases), culture for mycobacteria of lavado broncoalveolar (1 case), histopathological examination (3 cases). In 8 patients there was suspected clinical-radiological response to specific treatment. As to the classification of the radiation of the large opacities on chest radiography it was found that: 23 patients showed large opacity of The type (30,7%), 25 type B (33,3%) and 27 type C (36%) (Figures 1A and 1B). Of the cases surveyed, 74 showed masses conglomeradas bilateral, and only 1 presented injury unilateral (Figures 2A and 2B). Of the 75 patients with FMP, 44 underwent HRCT of the chest. As to the characteristics of masses reviewed by HRCT of the chest showed that 88,6% predominated in the thirds higher and were later. Excavations were observed in the 18.18% of the masses, broncograma air in 70,4% and calcification in the interior of the same in 63,6% of them. Emphysema around of the masses was observed in 72.7% and calcification of lymph nodes in 81,8% of the cases (Figures 3A and 3B). DISCUSSION silicosis is the pneumoconiosis more prevalent in Brazil and in the world. The interest in this disease was aroused by the finding of its high incidence in workers of the shipyards of the maritime edge of the Guanabara Bay (Niterói - RJ) who sought care in the hospitals of the region. These patients, in general, exposed to concentrations exceptionally high silica particles, develop the accelerated form of the disease and, more often, evolve into the complicated shape, with formation of large masses fibróticas that distort and destroy the architecture of the lung. (12) in This study, the sand blasting has been the professional activity that is responsible for the largest number of cases of the disease (82,6%). The prevalence rate of FMP, among them was quite high (39,7%), highlighting the importance of exposure to high concentrations of dust as a risk factor for the development of this form of the disease. Some authors(10) have described 92 cases of the FMP, and also reported the importance of the amount of powder aspirated into the development of this pneumoconiosis serious. Other,(13) when analyzing 733 patients silicóticos holders of FMP, found that the most significant risk factors associated with this form of the disease were: high levels of dust exposure, history of tuberculosis and a high profusion of small opacities on chest radiography. In the present study, the association of FMP with tuberculosis was found in 52% of patients, which confirms the importance of tb infection as a risk factor for the development of the FMP. It is known that silicosis is a risk factor for tuberculosis. (14) Some authors(15) reported a high prevalence of tuberculosis in the silicóticos jateadores of sand (34%). The diagnosis of tuberculosis in patients with silicosis can be extremely difficult to establish, especially when the chest x-ray shows the complicated form of the disease. Tuberculosis should be suspected in the presence of systemic symptoms (although they can be part of complicated silicosis) and in cases with radiological findings suggestive of tuberculosis, such as a rapid appearance of new opacities, and presence of pleural effusion and excavations. (16) To complicated silicosis is characterized on the plain chest radiograph by the large opacities larger than 1 cm diameter, with homogeneous areas of consolidation of the distribution segment affects mainly the upper fields. The lesions tend to form in the periphery and migrate in the direction of hilo, leaving a lung tissue enfisematoso between the consolidation and the surface of the pleural. The margins of the large opacities are irregular and ill-defined. With the advance of the disease, the masses tend to contract, arising emphysema and bubbles around and in the lung bases. The lungs lose volume gradually. The great masses of complicated silicosis can dig, as a result of ischemia and necrosis. The excavation, however, is relatively not frequent in silicosis and, when it occurs, should think of tuberculosis. The pleural thickening noted with frequency in tuberculosis is also common in fibrosis massive progressive, but pleural effusion is extremely rare. (17) the greater the profusion of nodules on chest radiography (categories 2 and 3), the greater the chance of evolution to the FMP. In general, the chest radiograph shows large opacities of the lungs on a background of nodulação diffuse pulmonary. However, the FMP has been reported in the absence of nodulação lung, due to the reduction of the visibility of the nodules silicóticos, by the incorporation of these within the mass fibrotic. (18) More than half of the patients with complicated silicosis presented in chest radiography large opacities of types B and C, which denotes the severity of the disease in these patients. Of all cases analyzed (n = 75), only one had great opacity unilateral simulating bulk of the tumour, and the diagnosis of silicosis made by thoracotomy with lung biopsy an open sky. Lesions solitary of the FMP, are often confused with lung cancer. Considering the higher incidence of lung cancer in these patients, it is important to do a diagnostic approach to effectively differentiate malignant lesions from benign lesions pneumoconióticas. (19) in This study, in the HRCT of the thorax to the large opacities predominated in the thirds upper and posterior lungs (88,6%). Broncogramas air, and calcifications in the interior of the masses occurred in more than half of the patients. Lymph nodes hilares and mediastinais calcificados were observed in 81% of cases, being 25% of type egg shell. Only 8 cases showed excavation in the interior of the masses, being that 6 of them had tuberculosis. Some authors(20) have described calcification scattered in the interior of the masses of the FMP due to silicosis, and others(21) have reported calcification of lymph nodes in 26 of the 49 cases of silicosis studied, with 12.2% of type egg shell, being that this manifestation of radiation was much more frequent in complicated silicosis than in the nodular simple. Other authors(22) have studied the evolution of the radiation of 141 patients silicóticos with x-ray serial and observed that the radiological progression occurred more in individuals with large opacities on radiographs in the early and in who had tuberculosis. In this study, the exposure to high dust concentrations in working environments and the high prevalence of tuberculosis in these patients possibly contributed a great deal to the percentage so high of cases that progressed to the FMP. Given that silicosis is an occupational disease fibrosante progressive, and that the cases of complicated silicosis have a higher probability of radiological progression, and evolve with greater frequency with change in lung function and premature death, it is essential to avoid the risk factors that contribute to the development of this form of the disease. 