OBJECTIVE SUMMARY: To assess by CT examination of patients undergoing bypass Gastrojejunal Y-de-Roux, without ring for treatment of morbid obesity. METHODS: We studied 40 patients referred to the Hospital Universitário Evangélico de Curitiba for diagnostic evaluation. They were in post-surgery and were operated in the same hospital. Patients undergoing laparoscopic operation with symptoms who needed diagnostic tomographic evaluation were included. The exclusion criteria: patients who had undergone bariatric surgery by other surgical techniques; which had been operated by other staff; who did not agree with the administration of iodinated contrast orally or intravenously; and exceeding the weight limit of the examination table. For statistical analysis we used the average of the variables. RESULTS: The patients presented aged 23-70 years and were 11 men and 29 women. There were no extra-abdominal changes detectable by total abdomen CT; of the 40 patients evaluated, 30 had CT findings within normal limits. The presence of stenosis of the gastro abstinence was found in a patient; internal hernia occurred in five; anastomotic leak in an abscess in three of the studies patients. CONCLUSION: The total abdominal CT scan failed to inform the cause of the symptoms of the patients in 87.5% of patients who sought medical re-evaluation of postoperative symptoms of bariatric surgery. Keywords: Patients. Tomography. Anastomosis Y Roux. Morbid obesity. Bariatric surgery.     BACKGROUND Given the multifactorial causes of obesity, the treatment involves many different approaches. Conventional clinical for morbid obesity continues to produce unsatisfactory results, with 95% of patients recovering their initial weight within two years 1. Obesity is associated with a number of related diseases, which end up causing early mortality 2,3. It is considered morbidly obese when their body mass index (BMI) it's greater than 40 kg/m2, or greater than or equal to 35 kg/m2 in patients who have some comorbidity4. In response to the global epidemic growth of obesity, new treatments have been proposed and improved, highlighting, among them the advances in surgery2. Due to the need for a more effective intervention in the clinical management of severe obesity, the indication of bariatric operations is growing nowadays 5. Surgery for treatment of severe obesity has been used for almost half a century. It began in the 1950s with operations that caused bad absorption, were abandoned in the late 1970s for its serious and common side effects. Since then, they began to dominate the procedures that limit food intake, either by simply restricting the capacity of the stomach, either by its division and anastomosis to the next meal. Among the surgical techniques currently considered for treatment of morbid obesity gastroplasty with shunt Y-Roux-en is quite used 2,6,7. With the increase in frequency of application of bariatric operations, it is necessary that the radiologist becomes aware of the techniques employed as well as the anatomical and functional changes resulting from these treatments 8. The postoperative radiological study, the research of complications and its early diagnosis are increasingly frequent problems for the radiologist in their daily practice 9,10. Technical limitations imposed by the own biotype and the clinical condition of these patients can make diagnosis difficult. A thorough and careful analysis of the tests is a challenge for the surgical team, together with the radiologist. Incorrect evaluation or late diagnosis of complications may delay the treatment and even endanger the patient's life. The aim of this study was to evaluate by CT scan the possible cause for complaints in postoperative patients undergoing Gastrojejunal bypass for treatment of morbid obesity.   METHODS This study was conducted in Radiology and Diagnostic Service of the University Hospital Evangelical of Curitiba and was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Evangelical Beneficent Society. They studied CT images of 40 patients referred for diagnostic evaluation of abdominal complaints had. Were in post-bariatric surgery for morbid obesity have been operated in Bariatric Surgery and Metabolic the same hospital from January 2011 to September 2011. Patients undergoing laparoscopic bypass Gastrojejunal were included, operated by a single team and postoperative symptoms that required diagnostic evaluation. the were excluded who had undergone bariatric surgery by other surgical techniques; those who had been operated by other staff; those who did not agree with the administration of iodinated contrast orally or intravenously and exceeding the weight limit of the examination table. The surgical technique consisted of laparoscopic access the peritoneal cavity with stomach section by linear stapling in order to delimit a gastric reservoir close to the cardia with a capacity of approximately 20 ml, being postoperative functional stomach. The rest of the stomach, just as the duodenum and the first 80cm of jejunum were permanently excluded from the alimentary tract. The gastric pouch was anastomosed to an isolated jejunal loop in Roux-en-Y, and its emptying limited by a hole 1.3 cm in diameter. The secretions from the stomach and duodenum with exclusion flowed into the jejunum by an anastomosis of 90cm duodenojejunal angle. All patients were interviewed to fill an identification card with the following data: name, age, sex and the presence of allergy to iodinated contrast or drugs. A consent form for computed tomography was delivered to patients and explained in detail, with a sign requested prior to the exam. All tests were performed using a multidetector device (GE LightSpeed VCT, United Kingdom) of 16 channels. They were conducted following the protocol service to study the upper abdomen and pelvis. The patient was positioned supine, with bending of the arms and forearms. Initially it was orally ingested 150ml of iodinated contrast nonionic iohexol (Omnipaque 300®; Nycomed, Princeton, NJ) diluted in mineral water for 30 minutes before the exam. The following was carried peripheral venous puncture in one of the upper limbs for injection of intravenous contrast. The tomographic images were obtained in the axial plane, with 1.2mm thick, before and after intravenous injection of Omnipaque 300® intravenously at a dose of 150 ml with a mechanical pump injector to 2-3ml / sec. in the arterial phase, portal and of equilibrium. After the acquisition of the images they were sent to the database file (PACS - Archiving and Communications System) of the CT scanner, where they were stored. The CT scans were evaluated by two radiologists, defining for each examination a tomographic diagnostic impression. Diagnostic and statistical definitions The computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis were analyzed generally focusing on reviews of the Gastrojejunal bypass surgery complications. Initially it was performed an analysis from the diaphragm to the pubic symphysis. If there were any extra-abdominal change, an additional specific examination was suggested. The Gastrojejunal bypass postoperative anatomy was studied by analyzing the volume of gastric reservoir aspect of the proximal efferent limb of the jejunum sutured jejunal loop (blind loop), excluded stomach appearance and distal gastrojejunostomy. Abdominal complications of gastric bypass were studied by evaluating: 1) stenosis of gastrojejunostomy, characterized by dilation of the gastric pouch, as well as by the dilation of the proximal small intestine handle to the transition point to the collapsed or by the no distension of the distal small intestine and colon; 2) internal hernia, when there was the presence of rotation (swirl sign) and / or engorgement of mesenteric vessels, mushroom aspect of the distended loops in the left upper quadrant, densification of fat planes of the mesentery and even the presence of bowel loop segment slender herniated located above the gastric level; 3) Anastomotic fistula, considered when found oral contrast of the tract of the drain or in the peritoneal cavity; 4) abscess, diagnosed when the presence of intraperitoneal fluid collection containing gas and contrast material inside. Data were analyzed using mean of variables.   RESULTS Patients aged they had between 23 and 70 years, mean 40.3 ± 12.73 years. Eleven were men (27.5%) and 29 women (72.5%). There were no extra-abdominal changes detectable by total abdominal CT scan, as well as, out of the 40 patients, 30 (25 women and 5 men) had CT findings within normal limits. Tomographic findings with changes) Stenosis gastrojejunostomy Of the 40 patients only one (2.5%) had stenosis of the gastrojejunostomy (Figure 1).     b) internal hernia was the most frequent complication. Of the 40 patients, five had it (12.5%). Of the five, three showed densification of fat planes of the mesentery and the presence of jejunal segment herniated located above the gastric level (Image 2) The other two patients showed rotation of mesenteric vessels (swirl sign) (Figure 3) mushroom aspect(Image 4) of the distended loops in the left upper quadrant and further densification of the mesentery fat planes.         c) Anastomotic fistula Only one patient (2.5%) had anastomotic fistula (Figure 5).     d) Abscess Three patients (7.5%) had abscesses included (Figure 6).     DISCUSSION With the dramatic increase of morbid obesity, gastroplasties became increasingly common and with that the changes and digestive and abdominal complications has increased. Physical examination of these patients is impaired by obesity itself and imaging may play an important role in clinical research. Often the radiologist is the first to detect the complications of these operations. For this reason, according to Francisco et al.11, it is of great importance for the expert to know the possible complications and how they appear in the image examination. Blachar et al.12 reports that while the potential benefits of laparoscopic surgery in Y Roux-en-are evident, it is little known role of imaging studies of the effect in the diagnosis of complications of this procedure.. Corroborating this study can be observed that many diagnoses were made possible through the CT examination. Labrunie and Marchiori8; Onopchenko13; Srikanth et al.14 consider CT as a preferred imaging method for investigation of abdominal symptoms, particularly in patients undergoing gastric bypass operation. Patients with non-specific and vague abdominal symptoms should be promptly submitted to CT with oral and intravenous contrast. In addition to diagnosing the obstruction also identifies transmesocolic hernias, mesenteric, umbilical and intussusception. You can also evaluate pain and thickening of the intestinal loop and related complications such as pneumoperitoneum, fistulas and collections. Patients included in this study underwent CT scan as routine for laboratory diagnosis of abdominal pain. Intestinal obstruction is common as a result of herniation or internal adhesion, even if the intussusception has also been reported rarely. Merckle et al. 15 in tomographic examinations in their study reported that with CT may be detailed the view of the anatomy after bariatric surgery through gastrojejunal shunt in Y-de-Roux with all structures clearly shown which was also possible to observe in this study. For this author gastric distention afferent occurs after Gastrojejunal shunt Y Roux-en-due to obstruction or swelling at the enteroenterostomia and the service experience, the imaging modality for this is the TC, because all the important structures they can be best seen, for example, excluded stomach, duodenum, and anastomosis low biliopancreatic handle. Blachar et al.12 believe that the combination of clinical and imaging criteria can help distinguish the adhesion of intestinal obstruction and internal hernia. The resulting from internal hernias tend to appear in longer period after the operation and demonstrate the signal of the mushroom aspect of distended loops accompanied by rotation of mesenteric vessels. Stenosis of the gastrojejunostomy probably results from ischemia and has been reported in 3% by these authors, according to this study 2.5% of stenoses. According to Lockhart et al.10 laparoscopic surgery of Gastrojejunal shunt and Y-de-Roux led to the reduction of perioperative complications, but the internal hernia remains as a problem. Corroborates this view the study Blachar et al.12 which found 2.8% of internal hernias and the study of Higa et al.7 2.5%. This research showed a higher percentage (12.5%). In studies of Blachar et al.12 all patients with fistula showed net collection with extra-luminal gas seen on CT; in this study two cases of anastomotic fistula were found, and only one of them had fluid collection. For the same author the most common location of the fluid collection was close the anastomosis and in the left upper quadrant including peri- splenic space just as was observed in this study. According to Labrunie16 imaging tests play very important role in the diagnosis and evolution of the patient follow-up and anastomosis fistulas are serious and feared complications in the postoperative period of bariatric surgery for its high morbidity and mortality. In our sample we obtained the diagnosis of fistula in one patient where CT showed extravasation of oral contrast in the upper left quadrant. It seems to be more sensitive to this assessment and might involve direct and indirect signs as well as the search of secondary complications such as colections. They are described in the literature several signs suggestive of fistula. The oral contrast extravasation view is a direct sign of this complication. Other aspects considered as indirect signs and already described in the literature are mainly collections adjacent to the gastric pouch and free fluid in the abdominal cavity. In this series these aspects were also found. According Merckle et al.15 abdominal fluid collections, subphrenic abscess and peritonitis are conditions that occur in less than 2% of patients undergoing bariatric operations. These are considered serious complications; clinical signs may not be enlightening and often the diagnosis is difficult. CT plays a critical role in patients with suspicions of these conditions and should be done without hesitation and can prevent sepsis, multiple organ failure and death. This research observed abscess in 7.5% of patients while Yu et al.17 found abscess in 15% of the patients. A total abdominal CT failed to inform the cause of the symptoms of the patients in 87.5% of patients who sought medical re-evaluation of postoperative symptoms of bariatric surgery.   