 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Assess by the examination of ct scans of patients undergoing bypass gastrojejunal em Y-de-Roux, without a ring for treatment of morbid obesity. METHODS: we Studied 40 patients referred to the service of tomography at the University Hospital of the Gospel of Curitiba for diagnostic evaluation. Were in the postoperative period of bariatric surgery have been operated in the same hospital. We included patients who underwent operation laparoscopic with symptoms in need of evaluation tomographic diagnostic. Were excluded patients who had been submitted to bariatric surgery by other surgical techniques; that had been operated by another team; that does not agree with the administration of iodinated contrast orally or intravenously; and they exceeded the weight limit of the exam table. For statistical analysis we used the average of the variables. RESULTS: patients presented between the ages of 23 to 70 years and were 11 men and 29 women. There were no changes in the extra-abdominal detectable by tomography of abdomen total of 40 patients evaluated, 30 had ct scan findings but within the limit of normality. The presence of stenosis at the gastrojejunal anastomosis was found in one patient; internal hernia occurred in five; fistula anastomotic in one, and abscess in three of the patients studied. CONCLUSION: tomography of abdomen total could not tell the cause of the symptoms of the patients in 87.5% of patients who sought re-medical assessment for symptoms of post-operative bariatric surgery. Descriptors: Patients. Ct. Anastomosis in Y of Roux. Morbid obesity. Bariatric surgery. INTRODUCTION Given to the cause of multifactorial obesity, its treatment involves various types of approaches. The clinical conventional for morbid obesity continues producing unsatisfactory results, with 95% of patients recovering to their initial weight within two years1. Obesity is linked to a series of diseases and related industries, which end up leading to early mortality 2,3. It is considered as morbid obesity when the body mass index (BMI) is greater than 40 kg/m2, or even greater than or equal to 35 kg/m2 in patients who have any comorbidade4. In response to the growing epidemic, world obesity, new treatments have been proposed and improved, highlighting, among them, advances in cirurgia2. Due to an intervention is more effective in driving clinical the obese bass, the indication of bariatric operations has been growing in present day 5. Surgery for the treatment of severe obesity has been used for almost half a century. Started in the 1950s with operations that cause malabsorption, were abandoned at the end of the decade of 1970 by its serious undesirable effects and frequent. From then on, began to dominate the procedures that limit food intake, whether by simple restriction of the capacity of the stomach, whether due to their division and anastomosis to the jejunum proximal6. Among the surgical techniques currently considered for treatment of morbid obesity gastroplasty with a bypass Y-Roux is quite utilizada2,6,7. With the increase in the frequency of performance of bariatric operations, it becomes necessary that the radiologist becomes aware of the techniques employed, as well as of the anatomical and functional changes arising from these tratamentos8. The radiologic study the post-operative period, a search for complications and early diagnosis are becoming more and more frequent to the radiologist in his practice diária9,10. Technical limitations imposed by biotype and clinical conditions of these patients can hinder the diagnosis. The thorough analysis and careful exams is a challenge for the surgical team in conjunction with the radiologist. Incorrect assessments or delays in diagnosis of complications may delay the treatment and even endanger the patient's life. The aim of this study was to assess by examination of computed tomography the possible cause for the complaints in the postoperative period of patients undergoing bypass gastrojejunal for the treatment of morbid obesity. METHODS THE present study was conducted at the department of Radiology and Imaging Diagnosis, Hospital Universitário Gospel of Curitiba and was approved by the Ethics in Research Committee of the Society of Evangelical Charity. We studied images by computed tomography of 40 patients, referred for diagnostic assessment of complaints the abdominal that had it. Were in the postoperative period of bariatric surgery for morbid obesity, having been operated in the Service of Bariatric Surgery and Metabolic in the same hospital, in the period from January 2011 to September 2011. Included were patients who underwent bypass gastrojejunal laparoscopic, operated by a single team, and with symptoms of post - operative who needed diagnostic evaluation. Were excluded that had been submitted to bariatric surgery by other surgical techniques; the ones that had been operated by another team; those who did not agree with the administration of iodinated contrast orally or intravenously, and they exceeded the weight limit of the exam table. The operative technique consisted of access by laparoscopy the peritoneal cavity, with a section of the stomach by stapling linear so as to delimit a gastric reservoir next to the cardia with a capacity of about 20ml, constituting the stomach functional post-operative period. The rest of the stomach, as well as the duodenum and the first 80 cm of the jejunum were permanently excluded from the transit of food. The gastric reservoir was anastomosed to a handle jejunal isolated in Y-de-Roux and emptying limited by a hole 1.3 cm in diameter. The secretions from the stomach and the duodenum excluded would in the jejunum by anastomosis to 90cm angle duodenojejunal. All patients were interviewed for completion of a form of identification with the following data: name, age, sex and presence of allergy to iodinated contrast or medicines. A term of consent for the realization of computed tomography has been delivered to the patients and in detail explained, and requested signature prior to the completion of the examination. All examinations were carried out using the apparatus of multidetectores (GE LightSpeed VCT, United Kingdom) 16 channels. They were conducted following the protocol of the service to study the upper abdomen and the pelvis. The patient was positioned in supine, with flexion of the arms and forearms. Initially it was ingested orally 150ml of contrast iodinated non-ionic iohexol (Omnipaque 300®; Nycomed, Princeton, NJ) diluted in mineral water for 30 minutes before the examination. The following, was performed venipuncture peripheral in one of the upper members for injection of contrast intravenous. The ct section has been obtained in the plan is axial, with 1.2 mm thickness, before and after injection injection of Omnipaque 300®, intravenously at a dose of 150ml with a injector pump mechanical 2-3ml/sec. in the early stages arterial, portal and equilibrium. After the acquisition of the images they were sent back to the file of the database (PACS - Archiving and Communications System) of the ct scanner, where they were stored. The ct scans were evaluated by two radiologists, specialists, defining in each examination, a diagnostic impression tomographic. Definitions diagnostic and statistical images of computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis were reviewed in general with a focus on the assessments of the complications of shunt surgery gastrojejunal. Originally, it was performed the analysis from the diaphragm to the symphysis pubis. If there was any change in the extra-abdominal, it was suggested an additional examination specific. The anatomy of post-operative bypass gastrojejunal was studied by analyzing the volume of the gastric reservoir, the aspect of the strap efferent proximal jejunum, strap sutured to the jejunum (handle blind), aspect of the stomach excluded, and the gastrojejunal anastomosis distal. Complications abdominal of gastric bypass have been studied by evaluating: 1) stenosis of the gastrojejunal anastomosis, which is characterized by dilation of the gastric pouch, as well as by dilation of the handle of the small bowel proximal to the transition point with the handle collapsed, or by the non-distension of the distal portion of the small intestine and colon; 2) internal hernia, when there was the presence of rotation (sign of the whirlpool) and/or engorgement of the vessels mesenteric lymph nodes, look at the mushroom of the handles distended in the hypochondrium left densification of the plans fat of the mesentery, and the presence of the segment of the handle of the small intestine herniada located above the level of the gastric pouch; 3) anastomotic leak anastomotic considered when found contrast administered orally, the route of the drain or in the peritoneal cavity; 4) abscess, diagnosed when the presence of the collection liquid intraperitoneal-containing gas and contrast material on the inside. The data collected were analyzed, using the average of the variables. RESULTS patients presented with ages ranging between 23 and 70 years, an average of 40.3±12,73 years. Eleven were men (27,5%) and 29 women (72,5%). There were no changes in the extra-abdominal detectable by ct scan of full abdomen, as well as, of the 40 patients evaluated, 30 (25 women and 5 men) had ct scan findings but within the limit of normality. Ct scan findings but with changes (a) Stenosis of the gastrojejunal anastomosis Of the 40 patients, only one (2,5%) presented a stenosis of the gastrojejunal anastomosis (Figure 1). b) internal Hernia Was the most frequent complication. Of the 40 patients, five were presented in (12,5%). Of the five, three showed densification of the plans fat of the mesentery and the presence of the segment of strap jejunal herniada located above the level of gastric (Figure 2). The other two patients presented with a rotation of vessels in mesenteric lymph nodes (sign of the whirlwind) (Figure 3), look at the mushroom (Figure 4) of the handles distended in the hypochondrium and the left and even densification of the plans fat of the mesentery. (c) anastomotic Leak anastomotic Only one patient (2,5%) presented anastomotic leak anastomotic (Figure 5). (d) Abscess in Three patients (7.5%) were included showed abscesses (Figure 6). DISCUSSION With the dramatic increase of morbid obesity, the gastroplastias have become increasingly common, and with this changes and digestive complications, and abdominal has increased. The physical examination of these patients is greatly hindered by the obesity and as well imaging tests can play an important role in clinical research. Many times the radiologist is the first to detect the complications of these operations. For this reason, according to Francisco et al.11, it is of great importance for the expert to know the possible complications and how they appear in the examination image. Blachar et al.12 reports that while the potential benefits of laparoscopic surgery in Y-de-Roux are evident, it is a little known role of the effect of imaging studies in the diagnosis of complications of this procedure. Corroborating with this study we can observe that many diagnoses have only been possible through the CT done. Labrunie and Marchiori8; Onopchenko13; Srikanth et al.14 consider the TC as the image method of choice for investigation of abdominal symptoms, mainly of patients who underwent operation for gastric bypass. Patients with abdominal symptoms nonspecific and vague should be promptly submitted to the CT with oral contrast and intravenous. In addition to diagnosing the obstruction, it also allows to identify hernias transmesocólicas, mesenteric, umbilical, and gastroduodenal gastric. It is also possible to evaluate the suffering and thickening of intestinal and related complications such as pneumoperitoneo, fistulas and collections. The patients included in this study were submitted to the examination of ct as a routine service for elucidation of the diagnostic of abdominal pain. Intestinal obstruction is common as a result of adhesion or internal hernia, even if the intussusception has also been reported rarely. Merckle et al.15 in tomographies performed in their study reported that with the TC you can have the detailed vision of the anatomy after bariatric surgery through the bypass gastrojejunal em Y-de-Roux with all the structures clearly demonstrated the that it was also possible to observe in this study. For this author the gastric distension afferent occurs after the derivation of the gastrojejunal em Y-de-Roux due to obstruction or edema at the site of the enteroenterostomia and, by the experience of the service, the imaging modality for this situation is the TC, because all important structures can be better visualized, such as, for example, stomach, excluded, duodenum, anastomosis low and handle biliopancreática. Blachar et al.12 believe that the combination of clinical criteria and imaging may help to distinguish bowel obstruction from adhesion and internal hernia. The arising of internal hernia tend to appear in longer period after the operation and demonstrate the signal aspect in the mushroom of the handles distended accompanied by rotation of the vessels mesenteric. Stenosis of the gastrojejunostomy most likely results from ischemia and has been reported in 3% by these authors, agreeing with this study, with 2.5 % of strictures. According to Lockhart et al.10 the laparoscopic surgery of the derivation of the gastrojejunal em Y-de-Roux led to the decrease of peri-operative complications, but the internal hernia remains a problem. Corroborating with this view, studies Blachar et al.12 where they were found in 2,8% of internal hernias, and the study of Higa et al.7 with 2.5%. This research showed higher percentage (12.5%). In the studies by Blachar et al.12 all patients with fistula presented the collection liquid with the gas extra-luminal seen in the CT scan; in this study it was found two cases of postoperative anastomotic leaks, and only one of them presented collection net. To the same author, the location, the most common of the collection net was close to the anastomosis and in the left upper quadrant including the space of the peri-splenic in the same way that was observed in this research. According to Labrunie16 the examinations of image play very important role in the diagnosis and follow-up evolution of the patient and the fistula of the anastomosis are serious complications and feared in the post-operative bariatric surgery due to its high morbidity and mortality. In the case of this study yielded the diagnosis of anastomotic leak in one of the patients where the CT scan demonstrated extravasation of oral contrast in the left upper quadrant. She seems to have greater sensitivity for this evaluation, which can associate signals both direct and indirect, as well as to search for secondary complications such as collections. Are described in the literature several signs suggestive of fistula. The visualization of oral contrast extravasated is a direct signal of this complication. Other aspects that are considered as the signs overhead, and already described in the literature, are collections mainly adjacent to the gastric reservoir and free fluid in the abdominal cavity. In this case-by-case these aspects were also found. According to Merckle et al.15 collections of fluid the abdominal, abscess subfrênico and peritonites are conditions that occur in fewer than 2 % of patients undergoing bariatric operations. These are considered to be serious complications; clinical signs may not be prominent, and often the diagnosis is difficult. The TC plays a critical role in patients with suspected of these frameworks and must be carried out without hesitation, and can prevent sepsis, multiple organ failure and death. In this research it was observed abscess in 7.5% of patients, while Yu et al.17 found abscess in 15% of patients studied. The tomography of abdomen total could not tell the cause of the symptoms of the patients in 87.5% of patients who sought re-medical assessment for symptoms of post-operative bariatric surgery. 