OBJECTIVE SYNOPSIS: To determine serum levels of lipoprotein and lipid profile of a group of subjects undergoing coronary angiography to establish a correlation between these parameters and the severity of coronary disease. METHODS: Serum levels of total cholesterol, HDLC, LDLC, triglycerides, lipoprotein(a), apolipoproteins A-I and B were measured in blood samples from 17 subjects with no coronary atheromatosis (controls), 12 subjects with mild/moderate atheromatosis and 28 subjects with severe atheromatosis. RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences between the averages of the three groups for the evaluated parameters, except for the plasma levels of lipoprotein (a) that showed significant differences between the means of control, mild / moderate and severe atheromatosis (p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: The mean values of the three groups for Lp (a) indicate a gradual increase in plasma levels of this parameter according to the severity of coronary atheromatous. These findings suggest the need for additional studies to obtain sufficient evidence for the introduction of routine assessment of Lp (a) in clinical laboratories in the monitoring of patients at risk for coronary artery disease (CAD). Keywords: coronary artery disease, coronary angiography, lipoprotein (a).     Coronary artery disease (CAD) has a multifactorial origin, including hereditary and acquired risk factors, which can be directly responsible or just associated with the disease1,2. Changes in lipid metabolism play an important role in the evolution of atherosclerosis3 and laboratory assessment of lipoproteins is of fundamental importance for the diagnosis and treatment of mesma4. Lipoprotein (a) has been described by Berg in 19635 as a genetic variant of LDL. Lp(a) shows a similar lipid composition to LDL, and differs in protein content, since it presents apolipoprotein(a) or apo(a) bound to apolipoprotein B by dissulfeto bridges6-9. The plasma levels of Lp(a) and the molecular mass of apo(a) varies widely among people, being 10 determined genetically. Lp(a) has no function in the transport of lipids, so its absence in the plasma does not cause metabolic disorders. Apo (a) has a high degree of homology to plasminogen, the inactive precursor of plasmin, protein responsible for the breakdown of fibrin produced in the coagulation process, due to the varying number of repetitions of the amino acid sequence, homologous to the kringle region 4 plasminogen. This structure allows the binding of Lp (a) fibrin and proteins on the cell surface of endothelial cells and monocytes, as well as the competitive inhibition of tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), reducing plasmin generation and fibrinolysis11. These characteristics give the Lp (a) pro-atherogenic 12-14 properties, with high levels of this lipoprotein associated with the risk of premature CAD, cerebrovascular disease and restenosis of coronary lesions. Some authors consider Lp(a) an independent risk factor for coronary atherosclerosis and brain arteries 10,14-16 in Caucasians, Chinese, African and Indians 9. The apo (a) gene presents genetic polymorphism size, with more than 30 alleles range 300-800 kDa, being suggested that this polymorphism may contribute to the elevation of Lp (a), in patients with DAC9,13. The real risk factor appears to be associated with the sub-population of Lp(a), and isoforms of smaller size and higher affinity for fibrin, those with greater association with DAC11,13. A large number of patients who developed CAD has a normal lipid levels or moderately high17, demonstrating that despite the enormous contribution of dyslipidemias for the development of CHD, other factors are also responsible for the atherosclerosis progression. Lp (a) is involved in the pathogenesis and progression of the atherosclerosis through different mechanisms. Prospective epidemiological studies and meta-análise10,14,16,18 demonstrated the positive correlation of Lp (a) and CAD. Frohlich et al 14. suggested that the determination of Lp (a) is an important tool in the evaluation of patients with CAD and it is particularly useful on risk predictions in women. However, the development and extent of CAD established by angiography lesion and the correlation with plasma lipid and Lp (a) are controversial. It is believed that a greater understanding of lipid abnormalities in the various phases of CAD installation can be a potential tool to assist clinical monitoring of patients with atherosclerosis, providing subsidies for the early detection of the severity of the injury. On all the above, this study aimed to investigate the existence of changes in plasma levels of Lp (a) and parameters of the lipid profile in patients with CAD diagnosed by angiography and comparing them with angiographically normal individuals, seeking to correlate possible alterations to the severity of the injury.   METHODS A total of 57 individuals in a period of three months, aged 46-68 years, of both gender, selected in the Hemodynamic Department of Hospital Socor of Belo Horizonte, after undergoing coronary angiography. Participants in this study were selected seeking homogeneity in terms of the gende, age, socioeconomic status and body mass index (BMI) variables. Based on the results of the coronary angiography, the components of this study were divided into three groups: control (n = 17), mild atheromatosis / moderate (n = 12) and severe atheromatosis (n = 28). Table 1 shows the characterization of groups with respect to sex, age and BMI. The study protocol was favorable from the point of ethical and formal view by the Research Ethics Committee of the Socor Hospital and the Ethics Committee of UFMG.     The selected individuals, were told clearly about the research objectives, and those who agreed, signed the Consent and Informed - IC. A medical record of each individual, with identification, demographics, family history and results of coronary angiography was filled by cardiologists from the Department of Hemodynamics. The study excluded patients with previous history (up to 3 months) of acute coronary syndrome (ACS); using oral anticoagulants, lipid-lowering drugs or estrogens; carriers of intercurrent diseases such as coagulation disorders, kidney, liver and autoimmune diseases, diabetes mellitus, and cancer; subjects with triglyceride levels above 400 mg/dL. The characterization of the groups in terms of risk factors associated with CAD and presence of SCA previous three months of the interview is shown in Table 1, as the number of individuals and percentage of a particular variable. The presence of smoking, sedentary lifestyle and family history of CAD was established based on the recommendations of the III Brazilian Guidelines on Dyslipidemia and Prevention Aterosclerose4. Hypertensive patients were considered participants with a previous diagnosis of hypertension that made regular use of antihypertensive medications. There was no statistically significant difference for the variables smoking, hypertension, sedentary lifestyle and family history among the three groups. Participants were not overweight or obese, suggesting the absence of the metabolic component in these individuals. For the variable ACS, individuals who had acute myocardial infarction or unstable angina were considered. There was a statistically significant difference between the control group and the severe atheromatosis group (p<0.01). Venous blood samples were obtained with the patient being fasted for 12 hours. They were told not to practice vigorous physical activity and avoid the consumption of ethanol in 24 and 72 hours, respectively, prior to the collection of blood in an attempt to obtain biological samples from patients in metabolic state of balance. The blood collection was made using Vacuette® system tubes (Geiner Bio-One), and having the samples centrifuged at 2,500 rpm for 15 minutes for the separation of the serum, whose material was divided into aliquots and stored at -70°C for three months. Total cholesterol and triglycerides were determined by colorimetric enzymatic methods, Randox Cholesterol CHOD-PAP and Randox Triglycerides GPO-PAP, respectively. The determinations of HDLc and LDLc were performed by the enzymatic method of eliminating Randox HDL Cholesterol Direct and Randox LDL Cholesterol Direct, respectively. Dosages of apo B and apo A-I were carried out by turbidimetric methods of Biotechnical, apolipoprotein B and apolipoprotein A-I, respectively. The plasma levels of Lp(a) were obtained by turbidimetry, using the In Vitro Lipoprotein(a) diagnosis conjunction. All measurements mentioned above were performed in the Cobas Mira Plus instrument, using control sera to check the performance of the tests. Friedewald19 equation was used in order to investigate the performance of two different methods for quantitation of LDLC. Coronary angiography was performed by the Judkins technique, the films were examined by three experienced cardiologists and the reports presented according to criteria defined by the narrowing of the arteries: up to 30% narrowing was classified as mild atheromatosis; from 30 to 70% narrowing was classified as moderate atheromatosis and above 70% narrowing was classified as severe atheromatosis in one or more arteries affected. In the statistical analysis, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for total cholesterol, apo B, HDLC, LDLC-direct and LDLC-Friedewald parameters, with normal distribution and homoscedasticity. The Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance test was used for the parameters apo AI and triglycerides, without normal distribution and / or homoscedasticity. The significance level was 0.05. Especially for Lp (a) parameter, analysis of variance was performed by using the Student-Newman-Keuls method, after logarithmic transformation of the data. The Sigma Stat Software, version 1.0, and Prism Software, version 3.0, were used to perform the analyzes and plot the graph, respectively.   RESULTS The results of the biochemical parameters are shown in Table 2 as averages and standard deviations. There were no statistically significant differences in total cholesterol parameters, HDLC, LDLC, triglycerides, apo AI and apo B. For plasma levels of Lp (a) significant difference was observed between serum control and atheromatous mild / moderate (p < 0.0001) between the control group and severe atheromatosis group (p < 0.0001) and between atheromatosis groups mild / moderate and severe atheromatosis group (p < 0.001). Figure 1 shows the distribution of Lp (a) values in the groups studied.         The prevalence of Lp(a) levels, greater than 30 mg/dL was of 0%, 50% and 67.9%, respectively, for the control, mild/moderate and severe atheromatosis. There was a significant difference between the control group and the atheromatous mild / moderate (p < 0.001) and between the control groups and severe atheromatosis group (p < 0.0001).   DISCUSSION The development of laboratory tests that can identify patients at higher risk of developing CAD is concern of many researchers and the subject of numerous studies. From this type of study, one can judge the usefulness of laboratory determination of a given parameter, to provide for the disease, establish its extent or monitor the effectiveness of the treatment. This cross-sectional cohort study evaluated a population from high to intermediate risk, since all selected subjects were sent to catheterization for evaluation of thoracic pain and presented epidemiology profile and risk factors for CAD as shown in Table 1. The three groups were homogeneous with respect to age, gender and BMI. There were no significant differences in age, smoking, high blood pressure, family history and physical inactivity (tab. 1). However, it is observed that in the severe atheromatosis group there was a higher incidence of smokers and hypertensive patients in the other groups. Among the 22 patients with previous history of SCA three months, 16 (57.1%) had severe atheromatosis, with a significant difference from the control group (tab. 1). In assessing the lipid profile, the average of the three groups showed no statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) for parameters of total cholesterol, HDLC, LDLC (direct and estimated by the Friedewald formula), triglycerides, as well as the dosages of apo A-I and apo B. The mean values obtained for total cholesterol, HDLC, triglycerides, apo AI and apo B are situated practically in the range of desirable and limítrofes4 values, demonstrating that the selected individuals showed no significant changes in these parameters (tab. 2). Similar results were obtained in a study with the Indian population, in subjects with CVD stablished by angiography20. Regarding the LDLC, the mean values obtained in this study for mild / moderate atheromatosis group and severe atheromatosis, are above the levels recommended for individuals with DAC4, demonstrating the presence of an important causal and independent factor for atherosclerosis and CAD in these patients. In order to evaluate the performance of two different methods for the determination of LDLC values, the Friedewald equation was used, widely used in laboratory practice to estimate LDLC values, being reported a positive correlation between the 96% order with direct LDLC (r = 0.96; p < 0.0001). For Lp (a) parameter, the difference between the means was statistically significant (p < 0.0001) between the control groups and severe atheromatosis, between the control groups and mild / moderate atheromatosis group (p < 0.0001) and between the mild / moderate and severe atheromatosis groups (p < 0.001) (Table. 2) confirming the concern of the American, European and Brazilian consensus in classifying it as a marker of emerging and independent risk for DAC1,2,4. It is observed that at the data in table 2, the media obtained for the mild/moderate atheromatosis group presents almost three times greater average than the obtained for the control group, and the average obtained for the severe atheromatosis beeing five times greater than the one in the control group, and about one and a half times higher than the average observed for the mild/moderate atheromatous group, signaling a progressive increase in Lp(a) plasma levels according to the coronary atherosclerosis severity. The analysis of Lp (a) also showed that in the control group all 17 individuals had levels of Lp (a) in the reference range of the method (Img. 1). In this figure, it is observed that the mild/moderate atheromatosis group (n = 12), only one individual increased significantly, with a much higher level than the average of the severe atheromatosis group, while five others had moderate elevations, but below this average. It is also observed that the average of the mild / moderate atheromatosis group is located in the borderline value of the reference range, already indicating an upward trend of Lp(a) in this group. positive correlation between Lp (a) and CAD established by angiography was demonstrated by Gupta et al 20 in the Indian population and also labeur et al 8 in the Belgian population, which observed elevations of Lp (a) values with increasing severity of CAD, in severe cases with significant stenosis in more than two coronary arteries. In the Brazilian population, Maranhão and cols.21 demonstrated the association between elevated plasma levels of Lp (a) and the extent of CAD in Brazilian Caucasians undergoing coronary angiography. Lp correlations were observed (a) with other variables of the lipid profile in the subjects studied, having been described similar results by Genest et al 10. However, Labeur et al 8 reported significant correlations between Lp (a) and LDLc, estimated by the Friedewald formula, as well as the inverse correlation of Lp (a) and triglycerides. There were significant differences in the prevalence of high levels of Lp (a) between the control group and atheromatous mild / moderate (p < 0.001) and between the control groups and severe atheromatosis group (p < 0.0001). The elevation of Lp (a) in the severe atheromatosis group was highly prevalent (67.9%). The evaluation of the prevalence of high levels of Lp(a) regardless of the degree of stenosis (mild/moderate and severe atheromatosis, n = 40), shows a high percentage (62.5%). Significant difference was observed between this group compared to the control group (p < 0.01). The table 1 and figure 1 analysis allows to infer the existence of a nonlinear relationship between Lp (a) and risk of CAD development in this population, considering the lack of significance with respect to risk factors in three groups. Therefore, Lp (a) did not behave in the study as a risk factor but as a marker or determinant of cardiovascular risk, since it was not possible to establish a relationship of cause and effect. Some studies show that the predictive value of Lp (a) to the severity and extent of CAD was higher in mulheres14,21; however, the present study showed no significant difference between the prevalence of high levels of Lp (a) between men and women in the population studied. On the other hand, some studies have shown no correlation between plasma levels of Lp (a) and DAC22 and other real attribute to the predictive value subpopulation of Lp (a) with a high affinity for fibrina11. According to this concept, some phenotypes of Lp (a) would not be associated with atherothrombosis, and, not all individuals with elevated Lp (a) would present increased risk of CAD. In the Brazilian population, which presents a heterogeneous ethnic groups, these type of estudies are rare. The focus group in this study (n = 57) consisted of 28.1% caucasians, 22.8% blacks and 49.1% of mixed race (mulatto, brown or other mestizos), with no statistically significant differences among the three groups to the different ethnic groups. Maranhão et al 21 demonstrated significantly higher values in Brazilian individuals of black race compared to Caucasians. However, the highest values in the black population were not associated with the presence or extent of CAD in this population. Multivariate analysis of this study demonstrated that the presence of elevated levels of Lp(a) have contributed to the development of CAD in caucasians brazilians. In conclusion, our data confirm the utility of Lp (a) to predict the severity of coronary atherosclerosis, suggesting that the levels of Lp (a) should be determined in patients with CAD, particularly in normolipemic, since Lp (a) behaved as a predictive marker of severity of coronary atherosclerosis, independent of smoking, hypertension, sedentary lifestyle, family history and lipid profile. In the light of this knowledge on the subject, before the controversies, and based on the data presented, it is expected that this work can raise spirits for further studies involving the measurement of Lp (a) in normal subjects and increasing degrees of coronary obstruction, confirmed angiographically in our population. Despite the knowledge of the existence of multiple isoforms of Lp(a) 12 that may hinder the performance of the fibrinolytic system, causing greater or lesser inhibition of this, it is considered very relevant the fact that all the components of the severe atheromatosis group had levels of plasma Lp (a) very high, when compared to the levels obtained for normal subjects, all angiographically proven. Even if the many variants of Lp (a) may affect with different intensities the efficiency of the fibrinolytic system, the relationship between Lp (a) and coronary heart disease must be cause for concern and constant research, especially in normocholesterolemic individuals. An analysis of the data found allows to infer about the usefulness of introducing the determination of Lp(a) in the evaluation of individuals who are at an increased risk for CAD, but not in the risk stratification of the population in general. The statement above is also supported by the continued and growing association between high levels of Lp (a) and risk for disease cardiovascular6,14-16,23-25 as well as the possibility of adoption of therapeutic measures and controle26,27. Although the values of the Lp (a) are not used to determine the severity of CAD, these can have a significant and additional role in assessing the development and especially the progression of CHD. This research is a challenge for many areas of study of the involvement of Lp (a) and other factors in the pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerosis. Acknowledgements To Prof. Dr. Ivan Barbosa Machado Sampaio, for helping with the statistical analysis. To the Foundation for Support in Research of Minas Gerais (FAPEMIG), the Improvement Coordination of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES), the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq), the LABORATEL Clinical Laboratory, the IN VITRO diagnostics and the biotech Biotechnology Advanced, for their support. Potential Conflict of Interest I declare no potential conflict of interest relevant.   