 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE: to Determine the plasma levels of lipoprotein(a) and lipid profile of a group of individuals submitted to coronary angiography, seeking to establish the possible correlation between these parameters and the severity of coronary heart disease. METHODS: plasma Levels of total cholesterol, HDLC, LDLC, triglycerides, lipoprotein(a), apolipoproteínas A-I and B were measured in blood samples of 17 subjects with absence of ateromatose in the coronary arteries (controls), 12 subjects presenting ateromatose mild/moderate and 28 individuals presenting ateromatose serious. RESULTS: No statistically significant differences were found between the averages of the three groups for all evaluated parameters, except for plasma levels of lipoprotein(a) that showed significant differences between the averages of the control groups, ateromatose mild/moderate and ateromatose severe (p<0.001). CONCLUSION: The means obtained in the three groups for Lp(a) indicate a progressive increase in plasma levels of this parameter, according to the severity of the ateromatose coronary. These findings suggest the need for further studies, aiming to obtain sufficient evidence for the introduction of routine assessment of the levels of Lp(a) in clinical laboratories in the monitoring of patients with risk for coronary artery disease (cad). Key words: coronary artery Disease, coronary angiography, lipoprotein(a). The coronary artery disease (cad) has multifactorial origins, including risk factors, hereditary and acquired, which may be responsible for direct or only be associated with the doença1,2. The changes of lipid metabolism have an important role in the evolution of the aterosclerose3 and laboratory evaluation of lipoproteins is of fundamental importance for the diagnosis and treatment of mesma4. Lipoprotein(a) was described by Berg in 19635 as being a genetic variant of LDL. The Lp(a) has a lipid content similar to that of LDL, and differs in protein content, since it presents apolipoprotein(a) or apo(a) linked to apolipoprotein B across bridges dissulfeto6-9. The plasma levels of Lp(a) and the molecular mass of apo(a) are very variable among people and is certain geneticamente10. The Lp(a) does not have any role in the transport of the supplier, therefore, its absence in the plasma does not result in metabolic disorders. The apo(a) has a high degree of homology with plasminogen, the precursor inactive plasmina, the protein responsible for the breakdown of fibrin produced in the coagulation process, due to the varied number of repetitions of the sequence of amino acids, homologous to the region of the kringle 4 of plasminogen. This structure allows the connection of Lp(a) to fibrin and proteins of the cell surface of endothelial cells and monocytes, as well as the competitive inhibition of tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), thus reducing the generation of plasmina and the fibrinólise11. These characteristics confer to the Lp(a) properties of pro-aterogênicas12-14, and the high levels of this lipoprotein are associated with the risk for cad and premature, cerebrovascular disease, and restenosis of lesions coronary. Some authors consider the Lp(a) an independent risk factor for coronary atherosclerosis and arteries cerebrais10,14-16 in caucasians, chinese, african and indianos9. The gene of apo(a) displays genetic polymorphism of size, with more than 30 alleles ranging from 300 to 800 KDa, has been suggested that this polymorphism may contribute to the elevation of Lp(a) in patients with DAC9,13. The real risk factor seems to be associated to the sub-population of Lp(a), with the isoforms of smaller size and higher affinity for fibrin, those with greater association with the DAC11,13. A large number of patients who develop the IPC has lipid levels normal or moderately elevados17, demonstrating that, despite the enormous contribution of the dislipidemy for the development of DAC, other factors are also responsible for the progression of atherosclerosis. The Lp(a) is involved in the pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerosis through different mechanisms. Epidemiological studies prospective and meta-análise10,14,16,18, demonstrated the positive correlation of Lp(a) and DAC. Frohlich and colleagues.14 suggested that the determination of Lp(a) is an important tool in the evaluation of patients with cad and is particularly useful in predicting risk in women. However, the development and the extent of injury to the DAC established by angiography and the correlations with the supplier in plasma, and Lp(a), are controversial. It is believed that a better understanding of the changes in lipid-protein interactions in the various stages of installation of the DAC can be a tool in the potential to assist the clinic in the follow-up of patients with atherosclerosis, by providing subsidies for the early detection of the severity of the injury. Based on the foregoing, the present study aimed to investigate the existence of changes in plasma levels of Lp(a) and parameters of lipid profile in patients with a diagnosis of DAC established by angiography and comparing them with the individuals angiograficamente normal, seeking to correlate the possible changes with the severity of the injury. METHODS we evaluated 57 individuals over a period of three months, with an age range of 46 to 68 years, of both sexes, selected in the Department of Hemodynamics of the Hospital Help of Belo Horizonte, after completion of coronary angiography. The participants in this study were selected seeking a homogeneity in relation to the variables of sex, age, socio-economic level, and Body Mass Index (BMI). Based on the results of coronary angiography, the components of the present work were divided into three groups: control (n=17), ateromatose mild/moderate (n=12) and ateromatose severe (n=28). Table 1 presents the characterization of the groups with respect to sex, age and BMI. The study protocol received a favourable opinion from the point of view of ethical and formal by the Committee of Ethics in Research of the Hospital Help, and by the Ethics Committee in Research of UFMG. The selected individuals was done for the clarification about the objectives of the research, and those who agreed signed the informed Consent Term Free and Clarified – IC. A clinical file of each individual with id, demographic data, family history and result of the coronary angiography was filled in by cardiologists of the Department of Hemodynamics. Were excluded from the study individuals with a prior history (up to 3 months) acute coronary syndrome (SCA); use of oral anticoagulants, drugs, lipid-lowering or estrogen; illnesses interval as coagulation disorders, renal diseases, hepatic and auto-immune disorders, diabetes mellitus, and cancer; individuals showing levels of triglycerides above 400 mg/dL. The characterization of the groups as to the risk factors associated with the DAC and the presence of SCA the previous three months of interview is shown in table 1, as the number of individuals and percentage of the presence of a certain variable. The presence of the variables smoking, physical inactivity and family history for cad was found on the basis of recommendations of the III Brazilian Guidelines on Dislipidemy and Prevention of Aterosclerose4. Were considered hypertensive participants with a prior diagnosis of hypertension and who were regular use of medications hipotensores. There was no statistically significant difference for the variables smoking, hypertension, sedentary lifestyle and family history among the three groups. The participants presented overweight or obesity, suggesting the absence of the component metabolic these individuals. For the variable SCA were considered the individuals who presented with acute myocardial infarction or unstable angina. There was a statistically significant difference between the control group and ateromatose severe (p<0.01). The samples of venous blood were obtained with the patient in the fasting of 12 hours. They were instructed to not to practice vigorous physical activity and avoid the intake of ethanol, in 24 and 72 hours, respectively, preceding blood collection, in an attempt to obtain biological samples of patients in the metabolic state of balance. The collection of blood was made using tubes system Tubes® (Geiner Bio-One), and having been the samples centrifuged at 2,500 rpm for 15 minutes for separation of serum, whose material was divided into aliquots and stored at -70ºC for three months. The total cholesterol and triglycerides were determined by enzymatic methods colorimetric, Randox Cholesterol CHOD-PAP and Randox Triglycerides GPO-PAP, respectively. The measurements of HDLc and LDLc were carried out by the enzymatic method of disposal of the Randox HDL Cholesterol Direct and Randox LDL Cholesterol Direct, respectively. The dosages of apo B and apo A-I were carried out by the methods turbidimétricos of Biotécnica, Apolipoprotein B and Apolipoprotein A-I, respectively. The plasma levels of Lp(a) were obtained by the method of turbidimetria, using the set diagnostic In Vitro Lipoprotein(a). All the doses mentioned above were carried out on the instrument Cobas Mira Plus, using sera-control to check the performance of the tests. It was used the equation of Friedewald19 with the aim of investigating the performance of two different processes for the quantification of LDLC. The coronary angiography was performed by the technique of Judkins, the films were examined by three cardiologists experienced, and the reports submitted in accordance with the criteria defined by the narrowing of the light of the arteries: up to 30% narrowing was classified as ateromatose light; 30 to 70% of narrowing was classified as ateromatose moderate and above 70% narrowing was classified as ateromatose severe, in one or more affected arteries. In the statistical analysis, the variance analysis test (ANOVA) was used for the parameters total cholesterol, apo B, HDLC, LDLC-direct and LDLC-Friedewald, who presented normal distribution and homoscedasticity. The test of analysis of variance, Kruskal-Wallis was used for the parameters apo A-I and triglycerides, which showed a normal distribution and/or homoscedasticity. The significance level adopted was 0.05. Especially for the parameter Lp(a), the analysis of variance was performed by the method of Student-Newman-Keuls, after transformation to logarithmic data. The programs Sigma Stat version 1.0 and Prism version 3.0 were used to carry out the analysis and to plot the graph, respectively. Results The RESULTS of biochemical parameters are presented in table 2, as means and their standard deviations. There were no statistically significant differences for the parameters total cholesterol, HDLC, LDLC, triglycerides, apo A-I and apo B. For the plasma levels of Lp(a) was observed significant difference between the serum-control and ateromatose mild/moderate (p<0.0001) between the control groups and ateromatose severe (p<0.0001) and between the groups ateromatose mild/moderate and ateromatose severe (p<0.001). Figure 1 shows the distribution of values of Lp(a) in the studied groups. The prevalence of levels of Lp(a) greater than 30mg/dL was 0%, 50% and 67.9%, respectively, for the control groups, ateromatose mild/moderate and ateromatose serious. There was a significant difference between the control group and ateromatose mild/moderate (p<0.001) and between the control groups and ateromatose severe (p<0.0001). DISCUSSION THE development of laboratory tests able to identify patients with increased risk of developing DAC is a concern of many researchers and the target of numerous studies. From this type of study, we can judge the usefulness of the determination in the laboratory of a given parameter, in the sense of predicting the disease, to establish its extent or monitor the effectiveness of the instituted treatment. This cohort study cross-sectional assessed a population of intermediate risk to high, since all the selected individuals were referred to catheterization for evaluation of chest pain and presented the epidemiological profile and risk factors for cad as shown in table 1. The three groups evaluated showed homogeneity in relation to age, sex and BMI. No significant differences were observed between the clinical variables smoking, hypertension, family history, and sedentary lifestyle (tab. 1). However, it is noted that in the group ateromatose serious there was a greater incidence of individuals, smokers and hypertensive patients in relation to the other groups. Among the 22 individuals with a history of SCA the previous three months, 16 (57,1%) are carriers of ateromatose serious, presenting a significant difference compared to the control group (tab. 1). In the evaluation of the lipid profile, the averages of the three groups did not present statistically significant differences (p<0.05) for the parameters total cholesterol, HDLC, LDLC (direct and estimated by the formula of Friedewald), triglycerides, as well as to the dosages of apo A-I and apo B. The values of the averages obtained for total cholesterol, HDLC, triglycerides, apo A-I and apo B are situated practically in the range of desirable values and limítrofes4, demonstrating that the individuals selected did not show significant changes of these parameters (tab. 2). A similar result was obtained in a study with indian population, in individuals with chd established by angiografia20. With respect to the LDLC, the means obtained in this study, for the groups ateromatose mild/moderate and ateromatose serious, are above the levels recommended for individuals with DAC4 , demonstrating the presence of an important causal factor and independent to atherosclerosis and DAC in these patients. With the intention of evaluating the performance of two different methods for the determination of the values of LDLC, it was used the equation of Friedewald, widely used in laboratory practice for the estimation of the values of LDLC, having been observed a positive correlation of the order of 96% with the LDLC direct (r=0,96; p<0.0001). For the parameter Lp(a), the difference between the averages was statistically significant (p<0.0001) between the control groups and ateromatose serious, between the control groups and ateromatose mild/moderate (p<0.0001) and between the groups ateromatose mild/moderate and ateromatose severe (p<0.001) (tab. 2), confirming the concern of the consensus of american, european and brazilian to classify it as a marker of risk emerging and independent for DAC1,2,4. It is observed in the data presented in table 2, the mean obtained for the group ateromatose mild/moderate presents is almost three times greater than the average obtained for the control group, and the mean obtained for the group ateromatose serious offers about five times greater than that presented by the control group and about one and a half times greater than the average observed for the group ateromatose mild/moderate, signaling a progressive increase in plasma levels of Lp(a) according to the severity of coronary atherosclerosis. The analysis of the results of Lp(a) showed, also, that in the control group for all 17 subjects had levels of Lp(a) in the reference range of the method (fig. 1). In this figure, it is observed that in group ateromatose mild/moderate (n=12), only one individual showed significant elevation, with a level much higher than the group average ateromatose serious, while the other five individuals showed moderate elevations, but below this average. It can also be observed that the mean of the group ateromatose mild/moderate is in the value limit of the reference range, already indicating a trend of elevation of Lp(a) in this group. Positive correlation between Lp(a) and IPC established by angiography was demonstrated by Gupta and cols.20 in the indian population and also by Labeur and cols.8 in the belgian population, which observed elevations of the values of Lp(a) with increasing severity of cad, in the most serious cases with stenosis significant in more than two coronary arteries. In the brazilian population, Maranhão and cols.21 have demonstrated the association between high serum Lp(a), and the extent of cad in caucasian brazilians, who underwent coronary angiography. Were not observed correlations of Lp(a) with other variables of the lipid profile in the subjects studied, having been described similar result by Genest and cols.10. However, Labeur and cols.8 have described significant correlations between Lp(a) and LDLc estimated by the formula of Friedewald, as well as the inverse correlation of Lp(a) and triglycerides. There were significant differences in the prevalence of elevated levels of Lp(a) between the control group and ateromatose mild/moderate (p<0.001) and between the control groups and ateromatose severe (p<0.0001). The elevation of Lp(a) in the group ateromatose severe, was highly prevalent (67,9%). The assessment of the prevalence of high levels of Lp(a) independent of the degree of stenosis (ateromatose mild/moderate and severe, n=40), demonstrates a high percentage (62,5%). It was observed significant difference between this group with respect to the control group (p<0.01). The analysis of table 1 and figure 1 allows us to infer about the existence of a nonlinear relationship between Lp(a) and the risk of development of DAC in the population evaluated, considering the lack of statistical significance with respect to the risk factors in the three groups studied. Therefore, the Lp(a) is not entailed in the study as a risk factor, but rather as a marker or determinant of cardiovascular risk since it was not possible to establish a cause and effect relationship. Some studies demonstrate that the predictive value of Lp(a) for the severity and extension of cad would be higher in mulheres14,21; however, the present study showed no significant difference between the prevalence of high levels of Lp(a) between men and women in the studied population. On the other hand, some studies showed no correlation between plasma levels of Lp(a) and DAC22 and others attribute the real predictive value to the sub-population of Lp(a) with high affinity for fibrina11. According to this concept, some phenotypes of Lp(a) would not be associated with af-related stroke, and not all individuals with elevation of Lp(a) would present increased risk of CAD. In the brazilian population, that presents a heterogeneity of ethnic groups, rare are the studies of this type. The group studied in this work (n=57) consisted of 28.1% caucasian, 22.8 per cent of blacks and to 49.1% mestizo (mulatto, pardo, or other crossbred), not presenting statistically significant differences between the three groups for the different ethnic groups. Maranhão and cols.21 showed values significantly higher in brazilian individuals of the black race, when compared with the caucasians. However, the highest values in the population of the black race were not associated with the presence or extent of cad in the population evaluated. The multivariate analysis of this study demonstrated that the presence of elevated levels of Lp(a) have contributed to the development of chd in caucasian-brazilians. In conclusion, the data from this study confirm the utility of Lp(a) to predict the severity of coronary atherosclerosis, suggesting that the levels of Lp(a) should be determined in patients with cad, especially in normolipêmicos, because the Lp(a) is behaved as a marker of prediction of severity of coronary atherosclerosis, independent of smoking, hypertension, sedentary lifestyle, family history and lipid profile. The light of the present knowledge on the subject, in the face of the notable controversies, and based on the data now presented, it is hoped that this work gives rise to a mood for other studies involving the measurement of Lp(a) in normal individuals and with increasing degrees of obstruction, coronary, confirmed angiograficamente, in our population. Despite knowledge of the existence of several isoforms of Lp(a)12 that can hamper the performance of the system, fibrinolytic, causing a greater or lesser inhibition of this, it is considered highly relevant the fact that all the components of the group with ateromatose serious had plasma levels of Lp(a) very high, when compared to the levels displayed by normal individuals, all proven angiograficamente. Even though the various variants of Lp(a) can affect with different intensities the efficiency of the system, fibrinolytic, should be a cause of concern and constant research on the relationship between Lp(a) and coronary heart disease, especially in individuals normocolesterolêmicos. An analysis of the data found, it can be inferred about the usefulness of introducing the determination of Lp(a) in the assessment of individuals who are at increased risk for CHD, but not in the risk stratification of the population in general. The assertion above is also sustained by a continued and growing association between elevated levels of Lp(a) and the risk for disease cardiovascular6,14-16,23-25, as well as by the possibility of the adoption of therapeutic measures and controle26,27. Although the values of Lp(a) are not yet used to determine the severity of cad, these may have a relevant role and the additional evaluation of the development and especially, in the evolution of the DAC. This line of research represents a challenge to various fields of study of the involvement of Lp(a), and other factors in the pathogenesis and in the progression of atherosclerosis. Thanks To Prof. Dr. Ivan Barbosa Machado Sampaio, for his help in statistical analysis. To the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa de Minas Gerais (FAPEMIG), coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de pessoal de nível Superior (CAPES), the conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), to the LABORATEL Clinical Laboratory, IN VITRO Diagnostics and BIOTÉCNICA Biotechnology Advanced, by the support received. Potential Conflict of Interest I Declare no conflicts of interest relevant. 