ABSTRACT BACKGROUND: Aspirin (Aspirin - AAS) can reduce adverse cardiovascular events in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) by inhibiting platelet activity. Some patients with CAD despite therapy with ASA, have high reactivity Platelet (ARP), which determines an increased risk for developing cardiovascular events. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of ARP in patients treated with ASA and referred to coronary angiography, and to evaluate whether there is a possible correlation between the severity of CAD and development of ARP. METHODS: A single-center study in which were included 115 consecutive patients treated with ASA and with stable CAD. Platelet reactivity induced by ADP and collagen were assessed by aggregometry transmittance Luminosa (ATL). Patients with platelet aggregation greater than 70%, induced by both reagents were classified as ARP, and in this group, adherence to treatment with ASA was assessed by determination of serum salicylate levels. RESULTS: The mean age was 60.9 years and the mean dose of ASA was 164.2 mg. Smoking and diabetes mellitus were present in 28.7% and 31.5% of patients, respectively. PRA was found in 14 patients (13%), however, in seven subjects (50%) were observed with ARP low serum salicylate levels ( < 2.0 mg / mL), suggesting non - compliance to drug therapy. 6.5% of patients with ARP was identified detectable serum salicylate levels suggesting a reduced effectiveness of the ASA. PRA correlated with the number and severity of coronary stenosis (p = 0.04). CONCLUSION: In a population of patients treated with ASA and referred for coronary angiography, high platelet reactivity is prevalent (13%), 50% of non-adherent patients to drug therapy and 50% have reduced drug effectiveness. Keywords: Coronary heart disease, platelet aggregation, aspirin / therapeutic use, coronary angiography.     Introduction Aspirin (ASA) is an important drug in secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD), as it reduces Cardiovascular Events More (MACE) in 25% of patients with Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) and Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) previously estabelecida1 . Despite optimal medical treatment, which includes the ASA ECM rates are above 10% in patients with stable CAD and above 28% in patients with SCA2. Several studies show that there are subgroups of patients treated with aspirin that persist with high residual platelet reactivity (hiporrespondedores AAS), so pharmacologic variability and reduced therapeutic efficacy could contribute to the relatively high rate of recurrent CV events in patients with CAD and treated with aspirin [Gum, 2003 # 24] [Angiolillo, 2009 # 711] [Helgason, 1994 # 26]. Furthermore, after percutaneous coronary angioplasty patients who have high platelet reactivity have an increased risk for the development of periprocedural Myocardial Infarction (MI), thrombosis and MACE stent3,4. Prevalence of High Platelet Reactivity (ARP) in patients treated with ASA varies between 0.4 and 34% depending on the population studied (healthy subjects with stable CAD, ACS, or diabetes), the type of methodology used to assess platelet function and parameter or cutoff value chosen to define ARP5,6. The lack of clinical and laboratory standardization to define hyporesponsiveness to aspirin, also called resistance, resulting in confusion on the clinical implications of this fenômeno7,8. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of ARP in patients treated with aspirin and referred for coronary angiography, as well as demonstrate the occurrence of this phenomenon may be related to poor-adherence to drug treatment or reduction of drug efficacy.   Methods The study design was approved by the Rio Grande Cardiology Institute Ethics Committee of the South and all patients completed the informed consent form. The study included consecutive patients from a single center, with stable CAD and who were referred for coronary angiography between January 2006 and July 2007. They were enrolled individuals who used drug therapy with ASA for more than two weeks with age > 18 years and agreed to complete the informed consent form. Table 1 shows the exclusion criteria. Patients were excluded if they were taking concomitant medications which could interfere with the measurement of platelet aggregation (such as oral anticoagulants or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug - NSAIDS), or if they had medical conditions that could influence the hemostasis. Blood samples of the artery or the femoral vein were collected after the insertion of the sheath and before the administration of heparin or glycoprotein IIb / IIIa. Samples were immediately placed under vacuum tubes containing 3.2% citrate and 1.8% EDTA. The tests of platelet aggregability were performed within 2 hours after sample collection. Platelet reactivity was assessed by aggregometry Luminous Transmittance (ATL) from platelet-rich plasma in dual channel aggregometer Net Lab 2020 using standard methodology. Whole blood was centrifuged at 162 g for 6 minutes to prepare platelet-rich plasma (PRP). An aliquot of PRP was centrifuged at 838 g for 15 minutes to obtain platelet poor plasma, which corresponds to the baseline turbidity equivalent to 100% aggregation. Platelet activity was measured by assessing the turbidimetric aggregation in response to addition of 20 mmol / ml of ADP and 10 ug / ml collagen. PRA was defined as adding greater or equal to 70% in 5 minutes after addition of ADP and collagen reagents. Subsequently, the plasma samples were stored at -80 ° C to allow the evaluation of adherence to drug therapy in patients with ARP by measurement of serum levels of salicylate (Sigma Chemical Co., USA). It was determined that patients with plasma salicylate levels below 2 g / mL were not on chronic aspirin therapy. The extent and severity of CAD was assessed by two independent interventional cardiologists who were unaware of the results of tests of platelet function. The coronary stenoses were considered significant if both cardiologists assess the severity of the stenosis to be greater than 50%. Statistical analyzes were performed using SPSS 15.0 and Stata 9.0 (Stata Corp, College Station, TX). Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation and normal distribution data were evaluated using the Student t test. For the correlation between platelet aggregation and the severity of CAD, we used the Pearson correlation coefficient and the categorical variables we used the Fisher exact test. The correlation between hyporesponsiveness to aspirin and the number of vessels with significant stenosis was assessed using logistic regression. Findings of p < 0.05 were considered significant.     Results Of the 125 patients initially enrolled in the study, 115 were included in the final analysis; three patients were excluded due to coagulation of blood samples prior to analysis of the same seven patients due to delay of more than 2 hours in the realization of platelet aggregation tests. The baseline characteristics of the patients are described in Table 2. The average dose of aspirin used was 164.7 ± 60.3 mg. Figure 1 shows a representative curve of results found aggregometry. In evaluations carried out in each individual, platelet aggregation induced by both ADP and by collagen showed a significant correlation between the results when assessed using Pearson's correlation coefficient (r = 0.68) (Figure 2). The intensity of inhibition of platelet aggregation showed no significant difference when comparing the different ASA doses (Figure 3), the platelet aggregation rates induced by ADP and by collagen are shown in Table 3.         The results of the platelet aggregation test demonstrated that 101 patients (87%) achieved indexes classified as an appropriate response to aspirin therapy (aggregation induced by collagen or ADP < 70%); however 14 subjects (13%) had values ​​greater than 70% with both reagents being classified with ARP. When analyzed the blood of 14 patients with ARP, seven of these individuals (50%) had lower serum levels of salicylate to 2 mg / mL (0.57 ± 0.24 mg / mL) were considered, therefore, as noncompliant therapy with ASA. It was also observed among the seven other patients who had greater than 70% platelet aggregation with both reagents (ADP and collagen), average serum salicylate levels of 18.4 ± 6.1 ug / ml, and therefore diagnosed hiporrespondedores as aspirin. When these individuals, hiporrespondedores the ASA were compared with those with normal platelet inhibition, the groups did not differ significantly with respect to age, sex, history of myocardial infarction (MI) or aspirin dose (Table 4). The prevalence of smoking and Diabetes Mellitus (DM) was higher in the group hiporrespondedor ASA (RC diabetes 3.16, 95% CI 0.66 to 14.9; p = 0.2 and RC tobacco 3.61; 95% CI 0, 75 to 17.24; p = 0.19), but these findings did not reach statistical significance. When we evaluated the presence or absence of CAD (defined as stenosis > 50% in at least one epicardial artery); in 85.7% of patients with ASA hiporrespondedores we observed significant CAD compared to 39.6% of patients with adequate inhibition of platelet aggregation (RC 9.15, 95% CI 1.06 to 78.8). The hyporesponsiveness to aspirin also seems to correlate the number of coronary arteries affected by stenosis significant (RC per pot 3.58, 95% CI 1.69 to 7.61; r2 = 0.24), and the patients showed a mean hiporrespondedores 1.85 ± 0.89 coronary arteries with stenosis / patient compared to 0.43 ± 0.79 in the group of individuals sensitive to the drug (p = 0.04) (Table 4). When patients were stratified according to the number of coronary arteries with stenosis > 50%, the incidence of aspirin resistance increased proportionally with the number of affected arteries (Figure 4). There was no difference between patients responsive to aspirin and hiporrespondedores as to which arteries were affected by stenosis (left main coronary artery, left anterior descending artery, circumflex and right coronary artery).   Discussion Recently there has been more evidence confirming the existence of a significant interindividual variability in the degree of inhibition of platelet activity achieved with standard antiplatelet therapy. The variability in response to antiplatelet therapy is an important clinical problem, since patients with CAD showing residual ARP after use of aspirin or antagonists of P2Y12 ADP-receptor, are at increased risk for developing CV9 events. The greatest risk of hyporesponsiveness to antiplatelet therapy occurs after PCI and stenting, where the ARP into effect of antiplatelet platelet dual therapy (TAPD), with ASA and antagonist ADP receptor is associated with a twofold increase in risk stent3,10 of thrombosis development. Stent thrombosis is a rare, but serious, since their occurrence determines IM rates higher than 60% mortality that range between 10 and 45% and 11-14 in increased long-term MACE these indivíduos15. Several clinical factors, including the presence of acute coronary syndrome, diabetes and congestive heart failure (CHF), and the body mass index (BMI) > 30 kg / m2 are associated with the development of hyporesponsiveness phenomenon to antiplatelet plaquetários16 . The prevalence of hyporesponsiveness to antiplatelet therapy has a significant variation (0.4 to 83.3%) depending on the drug evaluated, the clinical presentation of patients and ethnicity of estudada17 population; besides being influenced according to the method used to determine platelet activation and cutoff chosen to measure the responsividade5. More than five methods for evaluation of residual platelet activity are commercially available, and specific tests differ in their ability to predict ECVM4,18. ATL was used in this study by a method to be validated beforehand and be able to correlate the presence of ARP with a higher risk of thrombosis and MACE stent10,18. It is increasingly evident that patients undergoing PCI, hyporesponsive both aspirin as clopidogrel, have a markedly increased risk for developing ECVM3. Recently, hyporesponsiveness mechanisms of clopidogrel have been the focus of several clinical studies that showed that hyporesponsiveness to clopidogrel results in part to genetic polymorphisms leading to a reduction of the function of the enzymatic mechanism of cytochrome P450 which converts a prodrug of clopidogrel in form ativa10. Other additional mechanisms of hyporesponsiveness of clopidogrel were reviewed previamente9. Aspirin inhibits platelet activation by acetylating platelet cyclooxygenase (COX), resulting in irreversible inactivation and suppression of production of thromboxane (TX) mediated by COX, which is a potent activator of platelet aggregation. Compared with clopidogrel, the SAA to hyporesponsiveness mechanisms have not been so well studied. Non-adherence to drug therapy is a very important factor that contributes to reducing drug efficacy and increased platelet reactivity. A recent meta-analysis showed that non-adherence or discontinuation of aspirin in patients with CAD is quite common, and that in turn determines a three-fold increased risk for the development of MACE in these individuals 19. hyporesponsiveness of the AAS mechanisms are possibly related to the pharmacodynamics and pharmacogenetics variability of different physiological processes. Aspirin bioavailability can be affected by changes in the intestinal absorption; AAS can be hydrolyzed and inactivated by esterases intestinal mucosa and there is a possible interindividual variability in expression and activity of these enzymes. Furthermore, aspirin dose can affect the degree of platelet inhibition and several clinical studies examined the optimal dose of ASA in order to maximize the benefit CV seeking to reduce the risk of bleeding complications. Although some ensios have shown that aspirin doses of only 30 mg per day are able to completely inhibit platelet activity of COX-120, the recommended dose for preventing secondary CV varies between 75 mg and 325 MG21. Preliminary studies raised the possibility that daily doses of aspirin less to 100 mg could result in increased platelet high residual activity rate and an increase of MACE in patients with coronary artery disease estável22. However, despite this initial concern, studies arrolaram a lot of individuals participating and evaluating clinical outcomes for this issue of dose aspirin showed similar efficacy CV for doses above 100 mg / dia1,23,24. Drug interactions can alter the effectiveness of the ASA. Particularly, it was shown that many NSAIDs compete with ASA for binding to the active COX-1 receptors. Considering that these NSAIDs are non-covalent inhibitors and short half-life (6-12h), concomitant use with AAS results in allosteric blocking the COX active site. This blocking the active site of COX mediated by NSAID prevents the irreversible inactivation of COX performed by AAS and results in rapid recovery of COX function and consequent increased formation by platelets TX. The use of concomitant NSAIDs AAS therapy in patients with CAD showed an increase in risk for developing clinical IM studies previously publicados7. Inhibitors of proton pump (PPIs) may also alter the bioavailability of ASA through a possible potentiation in gastric hydrolysis of this fármaco20. PPIs are frequently prescribed in combination with antiplatelet therapy in order to prevent gastrointestinal bleeding. Despite the possible interactions between the concurrent use of aspirin and clopidogrel with PPIs, previous studies have failed to demonstrate that the use of a PPI increases MACE in patients treated with TAPD after IBP25. The body mass index high (BMI) and DM are associated with ARP4,26 and patients with ACS have higher baseline platelet activity in TAPD26 scenario. Although obesity, diabetes and are associated with the SCA hyporesponsiveness to aspirin, the molecular mechanism involved in the phenomenon of resistance to this drug in these patients has not been clearly estabelecido6,27. The increase in the inflammatory process that occurs in obesity, diabetes and SCA probably promote platelet activation and contribute to reduced antiplatelet efficacy, increasing activation of inflammatory pathways that increase platelet activity COX28. Although doses of aspirin > 100 mg / day can effectively block the function of COX-1, the action of COX-2 has been proposed as a possible additional source of serum TX and could contribute to the residual platelet activity elevada29,30. Until recently, it was assumed that COX-1 was the only isoform expressed in platelets, but now recognized that platelets from patients with an increased inflammatory process (surgery, infection, and increased production of platelets) expressing COX-2 in his superfície31. However, as COX-2 may contribute to the production in vivo TX is not yet claro22. What is observed is the increase of inflammatory mediators such as occurs in diabetes and in ACS can increase the activation of COX resulting in a incrmento in the basal platelet activation. Recent data support the premise that inflammation increases platelet activation pathways, since it was observed that patients with ACS platelets have higher rates of RNA transcripts of pro-inflammatory messenger derived from megacariócitos32. Genetic polymorphisms of proteins involved in platelet activation pathways may also contribute to the hyporesponsiveness mechanisms to AAS. Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms The (PNU) in COX-1 could affect enzyme activity and / or efficacy of inhibitors such as aspirin, thus contributing to the development of hiporresponsividade29. The prevalence of hyporesponsiveness to aspirin in our sample (6.5%) is similar to values ​​previously reported. In this study, we chose ATL to assess platelet function, because it is a method with appropriate prior validation and has a good ability to identify patients with ARP which present a higher risk to develop ECVM10,33. Coma intention to assess compliance with drug therapy was used a standard test for measuring salicylate plasmático27. Previous publications have shown that following ingestion of 320 mg of aspirin serum salicylate levels were equal to 19 mg / mL ± 3 mg / mL34. We observed in our samples, the aspirin users in which we observed a high residual platelet activity, had plasma levels of salicylate similar to those reported in other publications (18.4 ± 6.1 mg / mL), which confirms adherence to medication. The evaluation of the urinary TX is another method that can be used to assess adherence to therapy AAS35; However, this method is less specific since it can be influenced by TX not dependent formation of platelet COX-2 activity, as discussed anteriormente36. In order to increase the accuracy of our findings, we have chosen a strict cutoff point for identifying hyporesponsive patients with ASA, ie a platelet reactivity greater than or equal to 70% after stimulation of both the ADP as collagen. The choice of this methodology is consistent with other previously published studies that evaluated similarly adherence to treatment with AAS36-38. Although a lower cut point (= 50%) and a lower dose of reagents has been used by some other authors (5 uM / ml at 20 uM / ml ADP) to evaluate the hyporesponsiveness both ASA as to clopidogrel10 18, we chose to use 10 mg / ml collagen and 20 uM / ml ADP in order to obtain greater especificadade of our results. The aggregate findings to the stimulation of ADP and collagen showed a strong correlation between the degree of platelet activation (Pearson coefficient, r = 0.68). This correlation between platelet aggregation mediated by different reagents shows in a similar state of platelet reactivity after stimulation performed by two different routes of molecular activation. Although we have not evaluated directly dependent platelet activation pathways COX through the use of arachidonic acid, this study provides a proper reading of inhibiting platelet activity secondary to ASA mediated by the action of collagen and ADP (Figure 3). Furthermore, our findings suggest the existence of a possible correlation between the presence of coronary artery disease and the finding of platelet hyporesponsiveness to aspirin (Table 4, Figure 4). This correlation between hyporesponsiveness to aspirin and severity of CAD meets previous studies which demonstrated a persistent training TX in patients treated with ASA and with severe CAD previously identificada40, and individuals undergoing miocárdica39 revascularization. Mechanistically, a higher inflammatory status in patients with severe CAD can promote platelet activation and consequently contribute to hyporesponsiveness to therapy with ASA. In the present study, it was not possible to identify possible differences in response to treatment with aspirin since the serum salicylate levels were evaluated only in patients with ARP. In addition, the small sample size limits the conclusions on the role of clinical factors, such as tobacco use and DM in response to AAS, even if these factors have achieved a trend towards statistical significance, as has been shown in studies above. All the doctors were informed about the results of residual platelet activity of their patients. However, so far there are no data to suggest that the change of antiplatelet therapy in patients with high residual platelet activity decrease cardiovascular risk.   Conclusion In a cohort of patients with stable CAD referred for angiography, 6.5% of patients had ARP despite therapy with ASA. Future research should focus on understanding the mechanisms of resistance to this drug, and determine whether alternative strategies of different doses of the drug or the combination of an adjuvant pharmacotherapy can reduce the risk of cardiovascular events in patients rrespondedores to AAS.   