 SUMMARY background: aspirin (Acetylsalicylic Acid - AAS) is able to reduce adverse events cardiovascular disease in patients with Coronary Artery Disease (cad) through the inhibition of the activity of the platelet. Some patients with cad despite therapy with AAS, feature High-Reactivity, Platelet (ARP), which determines a higher risk for the development of cardiovascular events. OBJECTIVE: THE aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of ARP in patients treated with AAS and referred for coronary arteriography, in addition to evaluating whether there is a correlation between the severity of cad and the development of the ARP. METHODS: the Study of the unique centre where they were included 115 consecutive patients treated with AAS and the bearers of the IPC stable. The reactivity platelet induced by ADP and collagen were evaluated by Agregometria of Transmittance Light (ATL). Patients with platelet aggregation greater than 70%, induced by both reagents, were classified as having ARP and, in this group, adherence to the treatment with AAS was evaluated through the dosage of serum levels of salicylate. RESULTS: THE mean age was 60.9 years and the mean dose of AAS was 164,2 mg. Smoking and diabetes mellitus were present in 28.7% and 31.5% of patients, respectively. It was found ARP in 14 patients (13%), however, in seven individuals (50%) with ARP were observed low serum levels of salicylate (< 2.0 ág/mL), suggesting non-adherence to drug therapy. In 6.5% of patients with ARP was identified detectable levels of salicylate in serum, suggesting a reduced effectiveness of the AAS. The ARP correlated with the number and the severity of the stenosis, the coronary (p = 0.04). CONCLUSION: In a population of patients treated with AAS and referred for coronary angiography, reactivity, platelet high is prevalent (13%), while 50% of these patients are not adherent to drug therapy, and 50% have reduced the effectiveness of the drug. Key words: coronary heart Disease, platelet aggregation, aspirin/therapeutic use coronary angiography. Introduction aspirin (AAS) is an important drug in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD), since it reduces Cardiovascular Events Larger (ECVM) in 25% of patients with Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) and Coronary Artery Disease (cad) previously estabelecida1. In spite of the optimized clinical treatment, which include the AAS, the rates of ECM that are higher than 10% in patients with cad stable and above 28% in patients with SCA2. Several studies demonstrate that there are subgroups of patients treated with aspirin which persist with a high reactivity, platelet residual (hiporrespondedores AAS), therefore, the variability in the pharmacological and therapeutic efficacy reduced could contribute to the relatively high rates of events CV recurrent in patients with cad treated with aspirin [Gum, 2003 # 24] [Angiolillo, 2009 # 711] [Helgason, 1994 # 26]. In addition, after a coronary angioplasty percutaneous, patients that exhibit reactivity platelet high have an increased risk for the development of Myocardial infarction periprocedimento (IM), CHARTERS and thrombosis of stent3,4. The prevalence of High Reactivity Platelet (ARP) in patients treated with AAS varies between 0.4 and 34%, depending on the population studied (healthy subjects, with CAD stable, with the SCA, or diabetes), the type of methodology used in the assessment of function of platelet adhesion and of the parameter or cut-off value chosen to define ARP5,6. The lack of standardization in the laboratory and the clinic to set the hiporresponsividade to aspirin, also called resistance, results in confusion about the incidence clinic this fenômeno7,8. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of ARP in patients treated with aspirin and referred for coronary angiography, in addition to demonstrating the occurrence of this phenomenon may be related to poor adherence to pharmacological treatment or reduction in the effectiveness of the drug. Methods The study design was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Cardiology of Rio Grande do Sul, and all the patients fulfilled the term of consent free informed. The study included consecutive patients of a single center, with the IPC stable and who were referred for coronary angiography between January 2006 and July 2007. Were enrolled individuals who were using drug therapy with AAS for more than two weeks, with age > 18 years and who accepted to fill out the term of consent free informed. Table 1 presents the exclusion criteria. Patients were excluded if they were taking concomitant medications which could interfere with the measurement of platelet aggregation (such as for example oral anticoagulants or Anti-Inflammatory Non-Steroids - NSAIDS), or, if they present clinical conditions that could influence hemostasis. Samples were collected from the blood of the artery or vein in the femoral artery after the insertion of the sheath and before administration of heparin or inhibitors of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa. The samples were immediately placed in vacuum tubes containing 3.2% citrate, or 1.8% EDTA. The tests agregabilidade platelet were performed within 2 hours after collection of the samples. The reactivity platelet adhesion was evaluated by Agregometria by Transmittance Light (ATL) plasma rich in platelets in agregômetro dual-channel Net Lab 2020, using the standard methodology. The whole blood was centrifuged at 162 g for 6 minutes to prepare Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP). An aliquot of PRP was centrifuged at 838 g for 15 minutes to obtain plasma poor in platelets, which corresponds to the baseline value of turbidity equivalent to 100% of the aggregation. The activity of the platelet was measured by means of the evaluation of the aggregation by turbidimetria in response to the addition of 20 ámol/mL of ADP and 10 μg/mL of collagen. The ARP was defined as aggregation greater than or equal to 70% on up to 5 minutes after addition of the reagents ADP and collagen. Subsequently the plasma samples were stored at -80 ° c to allow the assessment of adherence to pharmacologic therapy in patients with ARP through the measurement of the serum levels of salicylate (Sigma Chemical Co., USA). It was determined that patients with plasma levels of salicylate below the 2 ág/mL were not under therapy chronic aspirin. The extent and severity of cad was assessed by two cardiologists interventional independents who were unaware of the results of the tests of function in platelet. Stenosis coronary artery were considered significant if both the cardiologists to assess the severity of stenosis as greater than 50%. Statistical analyses were performed using the software SPSS 15.0 and Stata 9.0 (StataCorp, College Station, TX). The data are presented as mean ± standard deviation and data with normal distribution were assessed using Student's t-test. For the correlation between platelet aggregation and severity of cad, was used the Pearson correlation coefficient and for categorical variables it was used the exact test of Fischer. The correlation between the hiporresponsividade to aspirin, and the number of arteries with stenosis significant was evaluated by logistic regression. Findings of p < 0.05 were considered significant. Results Of the 125 patients enrolled initially in the study, 115 were included in the final analysis; three patients were excluded due to clotting of blood samples prior to the analysis of the same, and seven patients due to a delay of more than 2 hours in the performance of the tests of platelet aggregation. The characteristics, baseline of the patients are described in Table 2. The average dose of aspirin used was of 164.7 ± 60,3 mg. Figure 1 shows a curve representative of the results of the agregometria found. The assessments carried out in each individual, the platelet aggregation induced either by ADP or by collagen showed a significant correlation between their results when evaluated by the Pearson correlation coefficient (r = 0.68) (Figure 2). The intensity of inhibition of platelet aggregation showed no significant difference when comparing the different doses of AAS administered (Figure 3), the indices of platelet aggregation induced by ADP and by collagen are shown in table 3. The results of the tests of platelet aggregation have demonstrated that 101 patients (87%) reached indexes classified as an adequate response to therapy with aspirin (aggregation induced by collagen or ADP < 70%); however, 14 individuals (13%) have obtained values in excess of 70% with both reagents, to be classified with the ARP. When examined the blood of 14 patients with ARP, seven of these individuals (50%) presented serum levels of salicylate below the 2 ág/mL (0,57 ± 0,24 µg/mL), having been considered, therefore, as not adhering to therapy with AAS. It was further observed, between the other seven patients who presented with platelet aggregation greater than 70% with both reactants (ADP and collagen), average levels of salicylate in serum of 18.4 ± 6,1 µg/mL, being, therefore, diagnosed as hiporrespondedores to aspirin. When these individuals, hiporrespondedores to AAS, were compared with those with inhibition platelet normal, the groups did not present significant difference in relation to age, sex, previous history of Myocardial infarction (mi) or the dose of aspirin used (Table 4). The prevalence of smoking and Diabetes Mellitus (DM) was higher in the group hiporrespondedor AAS (RC diabetes 3,16; 95% CI 0.66 to to 14.9; p = 0.2 and RC tobacco 3,61; 95% CI of 0.75 to 17.24; p = 0.19), but these findings did not reach statistical significance. When evaluated in the presence or absence of CAD (defined as stenosis > 50% in at least one artery epicárdica); in 85,7% of patients hiporrespondedores AAS noted-DAC-significant compared to 39.6% in patients with adequate inhibition of platelet aggregation (RC 9,15; 95% CI 1.06 a 78,8). The hiporresponsividade to aspirin also seems to correlate to the number of coronary arteries affected by stenosis significant (RC 3,58 per vessel; 95% CI 1,69 the 7,61; r2 = 0,24), and the patients hiporrespondedores showed an average of 1.85 ± 0,89 coronary arteries with stenosis/patient compared to 0.43 ± 0,79 in the group of individuals sensitive to the drug (p = 0.04) (Table 4). When patients were stratified according to the number of coronary arteries with stenosis > 50%, the incidence of resistance to AAS has increased proportionally with the number of arteries affected (Figure 4). There was no difference between patients responsive to aspirin and the hiporrespondedores in relation to which the arteries had been affected by stenosis (the trunk of the coronary left artery descending earlier, circunflexa and right coronary artery). Discussion Recently there was a greater number of evidence that confirms the existence of a variability inter-individual significant in the degree of inhibition of the activity of the platelet achieved with the therapies antiplaquetárias usual. The variability of response to therapy antiplaquetária is a major clinical problem, since patients with DAC that demonstrate ARP residual after the use of AAS or receptor antagonists P2Y12-ADP, are at greater risk for the development of events CV9. The greatest risk of hiporresponsividade to therapy antiplaquetária occurs after the ICP and the implant of the stent, where the ARP in place of therapy antiagregante aggregation dual (TAPD), with AAS and receptor antagonist of the ADP, is associated with the two-fold increase in the risk of developing thrombosis stent3,10. The thrombosis of the stent is a rare complication, however serious, because their occurrence determines rates IM more than 60%, mortality rates that vary between 10 and 45%of 11-14, and in the increase of CHARTERS in the long term these indivíduos15. Various clinical factors that include the presence of acute coronary syndrome, diabetes, and Congestive Heart Failure (chf), in addition to the Body Mass Index (BMI) > 30 kg/m2 are associated with the development of the phenomenon of hiporresponsividade to antiagregantes plaquetários16. The prevalence of hiporresponsividade to therapy antiplaquetária presents an important variation (0.4 to 83,3%), depending on the drug being evaluated, the clinical presentation of the patients and the ethnicity of the population estudada17; in addition to suffer the influence according to the method used to determine the activation of the platelet and the cut-off point chosen to assess the responsividade5. More than five methods for the evaluation of the activity of platelet residual are commercially available, and the specific tests differ in their ability to predict ECVM4,18. The ATL was used in this study to be a method validated previously and be able to correlate the presence of the ARP with an increased risk of ECVM and thrombosis of stent10,18. It is increasingly evident that patients undergoing ICP, hiporresponsivos both to aspirin and to clopidogrel, present a risk markedly elevated for the development of ECVM3. Recently, the mechanisms of hiporresponsividade of clopidogrel have been the focus of several clinical studies which have shown that the hiporresponsividade to clopidogrel results in part to polymorphisms in genes that determine a reduction of the function of the mechanism enzyme cytochrome P450, which converts the pro-drug clopidogrel into its form ativa10. Additional mechanisms of hiporresponsividade of clopidogrel were reviewed previamente9. Aspirin inhibits the activation of platelets via acetylation of cyclooxygenase platelet (COX), resulting in the inactivation and irreversible removal from the production of thromboxane (TX) mediated by the COX, which is a potent activator of platelet aggregation. In comparison with clopidogrel, the mechanisms of hiporresponsividade AAS have not yet been as well studied. Non-adherence to drug therapy is a very important factor that contributes to the reduction of the effectiveness of the drug and an increase of the reactivity on platelet adhesion. A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that non-adherence or cessation of treatment with aspirin in patients with cad is quite common, and that in turn determines a three-fold greater risk for the development of CHARTERS in these individuals 19. The mechanisms of the hiporresponsividade AAS are possibly related to the variability in pharmacodynamics and pharmacogenomics of diverse physiological processes. The bioavailability of the aspirin can be affected by changes in intestinal absorption; the AAS can be hydrolyzed and inactivated by esterases of the intestinal mucosa and there is the possible variability inter-individual in the expression and activity of these enzymes. In addition, the dose of aspirin can affect the degree of inhibition the platelet and several clinical studies have examined the ideal dose of AAS with the goal of maximizing the benefit of CV, seeking to reduce the risk of bleeding complications. Although some ensios have demonstrated that doses of AAS only 30 mg per day are able to inhibit completely the activity of platelet COX-120 the recommended dose for the prevention of CV secondary varies between 75 mg and 325 mg21. Preliminary studies have raised the possibility that daily doses of AAS lower than 100 mg could result in increased rates of activity and residual platelet high and an increase of CHARTERS in patients with coronary artery disease estável22. However, despite this initial concern, studies that arrolaram a large amount of individuals and that evaluated clinical outcomes for this question of the dose of aspirin have demonstrated efficacy CV similar to scores above 100 mg/day1,23,24. Drug interactions can also alter the effectiveness of the AAS. Particularly, it has been demonstrated that various Nsaids compete with the AAS by the connection of the receivers to the assets of COX-1. Considering that these Nsaids are inhibitors not covalentes and with a half-life short (6-12h), the concomitant use with the AAS results in the blockade alostérico of the active site of COX. This blocking of the active site of the COX mediated by the Nsaids, prevents the inactivation irreversible COX performed by AAS and results in rapid recovery of function of COX, and in the consequent increase of the formation of TX by platelets. The use of Nsaids concomitant therapy with AAS in patients with cad showed an increase in the risk for the development of IM in clinical studies previously publicados7. The Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPI) can also alter the bioavailability of AAS through a possible enhancement in the hydrolysis gastric this fármaco20. The IBP is often prescribed in combination with therapy antiplaquetária in order to avoid gastrointestinal bleeding. In spite of the possible interactions between the concomitant use of AAS and clopidogrel with PPI, earlier studies have failed in an attempt to demonstrate that the use of IBP increases CHARTERS in patients treated with TAPD after IBP25. The Body Mass Index high (BMI) and DM are associated with ARP4,26 and patients with SCA present activity platelet basal high in the scenario of TAPD26. Although obesity, DM and SCA are associated with the hiporresponsividade to the AAS, the molecular mechanism involved in the phenomenon of resistance to this drug in these patients has not been clearly estabelecido6,27. The increase of the inflammatory process that occurs in obesity, in diabetes and in the SCA likely to promote the activation of platelet adhesion and contribute to the effectiveness antiplaquetária reduced, increasing the activation of pathways inflammatory that increase the activity of the platelet of the COX28. Although doses of AAS > 100 mg/day can effectively block the function of COX-1, the action of COX-2 has been proposed as a possible additional source of TX serum and which could contribute to the activity of the platelet residual elevada29,30. Until recently, it was thought that COX-1 was the only isoform expressed in platelets, however it is acknowledged currently that the platelets of patients with an inflammatory process increased (surgery, infection, and high production of platelets expressing COX-2 in its superfície31. However, how COX-2 may contribute to the in vivo production of TX, still is not claro22. What is observed is that the increase in inflammatory mediators such as that which occurs in the SCA and in the diabetes, can increase the activation of COX, resulting in a incrmento in the activation of the platelet basal. Recent data support the premise that inflammation increases the pathways of activation of the platelet, once it was observed that platelets of patients with SCA present the highest rates of the transcribed messenger RNA of pro-inflammatory derivatives of megacariócitos32. The genetic polymorphism of the proteins involved in pathways of activation platelet adhesion may also contribute to the mechanisms of hiporresponsividade to the AAS. The Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (PNU) in the COX-1 may affect enzyme activity and/or efficacy of inhibitors such as the AAS, thus contributing to the development of the hiporresponsividade29. The prevalence of hiporresponsividade AAS in our sample (6.5%) is similar to values previously reported. In this study, we chose the ATL to evaluate platelet function, because it is a method with appropriate validation prior and shows a good ability to identify patients with ARP who have an increased risk to develop ECVM10,33. Eat intention to evaluate the adherence to drug therapy, we used a standard assay for the measurement of salicylate plasmático27. Previous publications have shown that after the ingestion of 320 mg of aspirin, the serum levels of salicylate were equal to 19 µg/mL ± 3 µg/mL34. We observed in our samples, users of aspirin, which was an activity platelet residual high, had plasma levels of salicylate are similar to those reported in other publications (18,4 ± 6,1 µg/mL), which confirms the adherence to the medication. The evaluation of the TX urinary is another method that can be used to assess the adherence to therapy with AAS35; however this method is less specific since it can be influenced by the formation of TX-dependent activity of the COX-2 platelet, as discussed anteriormente36. With the aim of increasing the accuracy of our findings, we chose a cut-off point rigorous identification of patients hiporresponsivos to the AAS, that is, a reactivity, platelet greater than or equal to 70% upon stimulation of both ADP and collagen. The choice of this methodology goes to the meeting of other research studies previously published and evaluated similarly to the adhesion to the treatment with the AAS36-38. Although a cut-off point lower (= 50%) and a lower dose of the reagents has been used by some other authors (5 µM/mL-20 μm/mL of the ADP), to assess the hiporresponsividade both the AAS, as to the clopidogrel10,18, we chose to use 10 ág/mL collagen and 20 µM/mL of the ADP with the objective of obtaining a greater especificadade of our results. The findings of aggregation obtained with the stimulation of the ADP and collagen showed a strong correlation between the degree of activation platelet (coefficient of Pearson, r = 0,68). This correlation between the platelet aggregation mediated by different reagents, shows us in a similar state of reactivity in the platelet after stimulation performed through two different routes of activation of molecular. Although we have not assessed directly the pathways of activation platelet-dependent COX, through the use of arachidonic acid, the present study provides a proper read of the inhibition of the activity of platelet secondary to AAS mediated by the action of collagen and ADP (Figure 3). In addition, our findings suggest the existence of a possible correlation between the presence of coronary artery disease and the finding of hiporresponsividade platelet with aspirin (Table 4, Figure 4). This correlation between the hiporresponsividade to the AAS and the severity of the DAC goes to the meeting of previous studies which have demonstrated a persistent formation of TX in patients treated with AAS and with severe cad previously identificada40 , and in individuals undergoing surgery for coronary artery bypass miocárdica39 . Mecanisticamente, a higher status inflammatory in patients with severe cad can promote the activation of platelet adhesion and, consequently, contribute to the hiporresponsividade therapy with the AAS. In the present study, it was not possible to identify possible differences in response to therapy with aspirin since the levels of salicylate in serum were evaluated only in patients with ARP. In addition, the small size of the sample limits the conclusions about the role of clinical factors, such as the use of tobacco and the DM in response to the AAS, even though these factors have reached a trend towards statistical significance, as have been shown in previous studies. All doctors were informed about the results of the activity of platelet residual of their patients. However, until now there are no data that suggest that the change of therapy antiplaquetária in patients with high activity platelet residual to decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease. Conclusion In a cohort of patients with cad stable referred for angiography, 6.5% of patients had ARP in spite of therapy with AAS. Future research should focus on the understanding of the mechanisms of resistance to this drug, and in determining whether alternative strategies of different doses of this drug, or the association of a pharmacotherapy adjuvant, can reduce the risk of cardiovascular events in patients rrespondedores to the AAS. 